                            THE HUNGRY HEART




This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license. If you are not located in the United
States, you’ll have to check the laws of the country where you are
located before using this ebook.



Title: The Hungry Heart
       A Novel
Author: David Graham Phillips
Release Date: April 13, 2015 [EBook #48699]
Language: English
Character set encoding: UTF-8


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HUNGRY HEART ***




Produced by Al Haines.





                        *David Graham Phillips*


                                _*The*_*
                             HUNGRY HEART*

                              _*A NOVEL*_



                          NEW YORK AND LONDON
                        D. APPLETON AND COMPANY
                                  1909




                          Copyright, 1909, by
                        D. APPLETON AND COMPANY



                      _Published September, 1909_




                           *THE HUNGRY HEART*



                                  *I*


Courtship and honeymoon of Richard Vaughan and Courtney Benedict are
told accurately enough by a thousand chroniclers of love’s fairy tales
and dreams.  Where such romances end in a rosily vague "And they lived
happily ever after," there this history begins.  Richard and Courtney
have returned from Arcady to reality, to central Indiana and the Vaughan
homestead, across the narrow width of Wenona the lake from Wenona the
town.

The homecoming was late in a June evening, with a perfumed coolness
descending upon the young lovers from the grand old trees, round the
Vaughan house like his bodyguard round a king.  Next morning toward
eight Courtney, still half asleep, reached out hazily.  Her hand met
only the rumpled linen on Richard’s side of the huge fourposter. She
started up, brushed back the heavy wave of auburn hair fallen over her
brow, gazed down at his pillow.  The dent of his head, but not he.  Her
eyes searched the dimness. The big room contained only a few large
pieces of old mahogany; at a glance she saw into every corner.  Alone in
the room.  Her eyes, large and anxious now, regarded the half-open door
of the dressing room to the rear.

"Dick!" she called hopefully.

No answer.

"Dick!" she repeated, a note of doubt in her voice.

Silence.

"Dick!" she repeated reproachfully.  It was the first morning she had
awakened without the sense of his nearness that had become so dear, so
necessary.  It was the first morning in this house strange to her—in
this now life they were to make beautiful and happy together.  She gave
a forlorn sigh like a disappointed child, drew up her knees, rested her
elbows upon them, and her small head upon her hands.  Sitting there in
the midst of that bed big enough for half a dozen as small as she, she
suggested a butterfly poised motionless with folded wings.  A moment and
she lifted her drooped head.  How considerate of him not to wake her
when the three days and nights on train had been so wearing!

Swift and light as a butterfly she sprang from the bed, flung open the
shutters of the lake-front windows.  In poured summer like gay cavalcade
through breach in gloomy walls—summer in full panoply of perfume and
soft air and sparkling sunshine.  She almost laughed aloud for joy at
this timely rescue.  She gazed away across the lake to the town where
she was born and bred!  "Home!" she cried.  "And so happy—so utterly
happy!"  Her expression, her whole manner, her quick movements gave the
impression of the impulsive self-unconsciousness of a child.

It was a radiant figure, small and perfect like a sun sprite, that
issued from the room three quarters of an hour later to flit along the
polished oak hall, to descend a stairway glistening like hall above and
wider and loftier hall below.  With hair piled high on her small head,
with tail of matinee over her arm and tall heels clicking merrily on the
steps, she whistled as she went.  Some people—women—criticised that
laughter-loving mouth of hers as too wide for so small a face.  It
certainly did not suggest a button-hole.  But no one could have found
fault with the shape of the mouth or with the coloring, whether of the
lips or within, or with her teeth, pearl white and seeming the whiter
for the rose bronze of her skin—the shade that seems to be of the
essence of youth, health, and summer.  Her nose was rather large, but
slender and well shaped.  It was the nose of mobility, of sensitiveness,
of intelligence, not at all of repose.  And there were her eyes, of a
strange soft emerald, with long dark lashes; the brows long also and
only slightly curved, and slender yet distinct.  These eyes were her
greatest beauty—greater even than her skin.  It would have been
difficult to say whether in them or in her mouth lay her greatest charm,
for charm is not always beauty, and beauty often wholly lacks charm.

But woman feels that figure determines the woman—"the woman" meaning, of
course, efficiency as a man catcher.  It was upon Courtney’s flawless
figure that the sour glance of old Nanny, the head servant, rested—old
Nanny, whose puritanism aggravated for her by suppression all the damned
charms of "the flesh."  Nanny had reigned supreme in that house ever
since Dick Vaughan was left alone; so from the first news of the
engagement she had been hating Courtney, whom she regarded as her
supplanter.  As Courtney entered the dining room, stiff and dim and
chilly, like all the rooms in that house, old Nanny was superintending
fat, subdued Mazie at work at the breakfast table.  It occupied the
exact center of the room, formal as for a state banquet.

"Good morning," cried Courtney in her charming manner of bright
friendliness.  "Good morning, Mazie.  Am I late?  Where’s Richard?"  Her
voice was deeper than one would have expected, but low and musical.

Mazie smiled a welcome, then cast a frightened glance of apology at
Nanny, who did not smile.  "Mr. Richard’s down to the Smoke House," said
she.

The Smoke House was the laboratory Dick’s grandfather, Achilles Vaughan,
had built for him on the site of the smoke house of the pioneer Vaughan,
settler there when Wenona was a trading post in New France.  "Of
course!" said Courtney.  "I might have known.  He wanted to go last
night, but I wouldn’t let him."

Nanny scowled at this innocent, laughing "I wouldn’t let him."  She
turned on Mazie, who was gazing open-mouthed at Courtney’s simple, fresh
finery.  "What’r ye gawkin’ here fur, with your mouth hangin’ like a
chicken with the gaps?" she demanded in a fierce aside.  Mazie lumbered
through the door into the kitchen.  "As I was saying," continued Nanny
to her new mistress, "he’s put in most nigh all his time down to that
there smoke house day and night—ever since his aunt, Miss Eudosia, died.
Yes, an’ before that, while Colonel ’Kill, his grandfather, was still
alive.  He’s got sleeping rooms and everything in the upstairs.  He
often don’t come here even to meals for weeks.  Mazie or Jimmie carry
’em to him."

Courtney nodded.  "A regular hermit.  It was the merest chance that we
happened to meet."

"You was the first young woman he’d laid an eye on in a long time."

Nanny’s tone was colorless.  Only a very stupid woman puts both barb and
poison on a shaft when either is enough. Courtney, who understood and
felt remorseful about the old woman’s jealous anger, answered with
good-humored gentleness: "I guess that _was_ why I got him.  But he’ll
not be a hermit any more."

"He’s begun already," said Nanny.

"We mustn’t allow it," replied Courtney, not quite so good-humoredly.
The old woman’s steady bearing down was having its effect.

"There’s no goin’ agin nature.  The Vaughan men ain’t ever bothered much
about women.  They don’t let foolishness detain ’em long.  And this
one’s his gran’paw over agin.  When he gits at his work, he’s like a dog
after a rabbit."

"It seems a little chilly and damp in here," said Courtney.  "Do help me
open the windows.  I love sun and air."

"Miss Eudosia—" began Nanny, and checked herself with a considerable
shortening of the distance between chin and end of nose.

Courtney understood what that beginning meant.  But she ignored.  "And,"
she went on, busying herself with curtains and fastenings, "we’ll move
the table in front of this big window.  I like breakfast near the window
in summer, near the fire in winter."

Nanny lowered upon the small straight young figure, so bright and
graceful.  "Miss Eudosia—" she began fiercely. Again she checked
herself, but it was to say with bitterness, "But then she’s dead—and
forgot."

"No, indeed!" protested Courtney.  "You’d have thought she’d gone only a
few months ago instead of four years if you’d heard Richard talking
about her yesterday. And I’m sure she’d have done what I’m suggesting if
she’d happened to think of it."  Then with a look that might have
softened any but a woman resolved to hate another woman: "Do try to
humor me in little things, Nanny.  I’ll be very meek about things that
do matter.  I’ve had no experience in keeping house.  You’ll teach me,
won’t you?"

Nanny stood inflexible, her wrinkled hands folded tightly at the waist
line of her black alpaca.  She could not help Courtney displace that
table from its ancient site. It was as if this frivolous, whistling,
useless chit of an ornamental wife were violating the sacred Eudosia’s
coffin—the graves of all the Vaughans—for traditions are graves, and
Nanny, like all who live by tradition, lived among graves.  After a time
Courtney, more nervous under those angry eyes than she showed, got the
table at the open window.  The room was livable now, and after she had
rearranged the dishes the table looked invitingly human.  But her
buoyant young enthusiasm had oozed away.  With wistful gaze out over
prim lawns and flower beds, stiff and staid as Sunday, she said: "I
guess I’ll bring Richard to breakfast."

"He et before he went."

"Oh!"  Courtney’s tone showed that she was hurt. But she instantly
brightened.  "I’ll get him to come and sit with me while I have
breakfast."

A covert sneering smile in the depths of Nanny’s eyes made her flush
angrily.  "If I was you I wouldn’t interrupt him," said the old woman.
"He don’t allow it."

"How absurd!" cried Courtney.  But straightway she was amazed and
shocked at herself—on this her first morning in the new and beautiful
life, to be drawn nearer a vulgar squabble than in all her nineteen
years—and with an old woman toward whom it would be cowardice not to be
forbearing.  "I’m cross because I’m hungry," she said contritely.
"While breakfast’s coming I’ll run down for him."

"He’s set in his ways," said Nanny.

"He’ll not mind me—this once."  And she took up her train and went by
the long French window to the broad veranda with its big fluted pillars.
At the end steps she paused.  Yes, it was summer in the Vaughan grounds
as elsewhere.  But that prodigal wanton had there been caught, had had
her tresses sleeked and bound, her luxuriant figure corseted and clad in
the most repellant classical severity.  Courtney, of the eyes keen for
color and form and fitness of things, felt rebuked and subdued once
more.  She glanced farther round, saw Nanny’s parchment face and
sinister gaze watching and hating her. There is a limit beyond which
youth refuses to be suppressed and compressed, and defiantly expands in
more than its natural gay audacity.  This climax of Nanny,
representative of Vaughans not so rigid in death as they had been in
life, was just the necessary little-too-much.  With a laugh and a toss
of the head, she swung her skirts very high indeed above her pretty
ankles and ran like a young antelope across the lawn, and into and along
the path leading away toward the eastern part of the grounds. Through a
carefully artificial thicket of lilacs, elders, and snowballs she sped,
then through a small wood with not a spray of underbrush anywhere.  She
came out in a clearing at the water’s edge.  Before her, one of its
walls rising sheer from the retaining wall of the lake, stood the
laboratory.

She paused astonished.  She had expected a temporary sort of structure.
Before her rose a fitting temple for the mysteries of the "black art."
It was a long two-story building of stone and brick, not visible from
the lake proper because it stood upon the bank of a deep, narrow inlet.
The weather had stained its walls into the semblance of age wherever
they showed through the heavy mantle of bitter-sweet that overspread
even the roof.  Around the place hung an air of aloofness and seclusion,
of mystery, that appealed to her young instinct for the romantic.  The
brick path divided into two.  One went to what was obviously the
entrance to the second-story bachelor suite; the other turned to the
left, rounded the corner of the house, ended at the massive iron door of
the laboratory proper.

This door was wide open.  Courtney stood upon the threshold like a
bright bird peering from the sunshine into the entrance to a cave.  The
air that came out was heavy with the odors of chemicals, but not sharp
or especially unpleasant.  Besides, in high school and college she had
done a good deal at chemistry, enough to be seized of its fascination.
She stood gazing into a big high-ceilinged room, filled with a
bewildering variety of unusual articles—gigantic bottles, cylinders,
vials, jars of glass, of stone, of metal; huge retorts with coils of
pipe, lead and rubber; lamps and balances and mortars; tiers on tiers of
crowded shelves of glass and porcelain and iron; drying ovens,
distilling apparatus, condensers and generators, crushers and
pulverizers, cupels and cupel trays, calorimeters and crucibles and
microscopes; floor all but filled with batteries and engines and
machines of gold and platinum, of aluminum and copper, of brass and
steel and glass and nickel.  A thousand articles, in the orderly
confusion that indicates constant use.

She was more and more amazed as she stared and reflected.  "He works
with all these things!" thought she, depressed for no clear reason.  "I
had no idea—no idea!"

She ventured a step farther.  In a twinkling her expression of wonder
and vague pain vanished before a love light that seemed to stream not
from her face only, but from her whole body, with those rare eyes of
hers as radiating centers.  She was seeing Richard—near a window, so
standing that his long high-bred face was in profile to her.  He was
tall, well above six feet; his careless flannels revealed the strong,
slender, narrow form of the pioneers and their pure-blooded descendants.
His fairish hair was thick and wavy—"Thank Heaven, not curly!" thought
Courtney.

She did not interrupt.  She preferred to watch him, to let her glance
caress him, all unconscious of her presence.  In one hand he was
balancing a huge bottle; the other held a long test tube.  He was slowly
dropping the bottle’s contents of quiet colorless liquid into the test
tube, which was half full of a liquid, also quiet and colorless. Each
drop as it touched the surface of the liquid dissolved into black steam.
It was this steam that gave off the pungent odor.  As she watched, there
came a slow tightening at her throat, at her heart.

"I never saw him look like this," thought she.  No, it wasn’t his
serious intentness; one of the things she had first noted about him, and
best loved, was the seriousness of his deep-set dark gray eyes—the look
of the man who "amounts to something," and would prove it before he got
through.  No, it was the _kind_ of seriousness.  She felt she was seeing
a Richard Vaughan she did not know at all. "But, then," she reflected,
"there’s a side of me he doesn’t know about either."  This, however, did
not satisfy her. The man she was now seeing disquietingly suggested that
the Richard Vaughan she had been knowing and loving and had been loved
by was not the real man at all, but only one of his moods.  "I thought
he just amused himself with chemistry.  Instead—  Nanny is about right."
A pang shot through her; she would have recognized it as jealousy, had
she stopped to think.  But at nineteen one does not stop to think.  "I
do believe he cares almost as much for this as he does for me."

He lowered the bottle to the table.  As he straightened up, he caught
sight of her.  His expression changed; but the change was not nearly
enough either in degree or in kind to satisfy her.  "Hello!" cried he
carelessly.  "Good morning."

She got ready to be kissed.  But, instead of coming toward her, he half
turned away, to hold the test tube up between his eyes and the light.
"Um—mm," he grumbled, shaking it again and again, and each time looking
disappointedly at the unchanged liquid.

Like all American girls of the classes that shelter their women, she had
been brought up to accept as genuine the pretense of superhuman respect
and deference the American man—usually in all honesty—affects toward
woman—until he marries her, or for whatever reason becomes tired and
truthful.  She had been confirmed in these ideas of man as woman’s
incessant courtier, almost servant, by receiving for the last five
lively years the admiration, exaggerated and ardent, which physical
charm, so long as it is potent, exacts from the male.  No more than
other women of her age—or than older women—or than the men had she
penetrated the deceptive surface of things and discovered beneath
"chivalry’s" smug meaningless professions the reality, the forbearance
of "strength" with "weakness," the graciousness of superior for
inferior. Thus, such treatment as this of Dick’s would have been
humiliating from a casual man, on a casual occasion.  From her husband,
her lover, the man she had just been garlanding with all the fairest
flowers of her ardent young heart—from him, and on this "first" morning,
this unconcern, which Nanny’s talk enabled her to understand, was worse
than stab into feminine vanity; it was stab straight into her inmost
self, the seat of her life.

She dared not admit the wound—not to her own secret thought.  Bravely
she struggled until her voice and manner were under control.  "I’ve come
to take you to breakfast," said she.  It seemed to her that her tone was
gratifying evidence of triumph of strength of character over "silly
supersensitiveness—as if Dick could mean to hurt _me_!"

"Breakfast," repeated he.  His gaze was discontentedly upon the bottle
whose contents had acted disappointingly. "Breakfast—  Oh, yes—  Don’t
wait on me.  I had coffee before I came down here.  I’ll be along in a
few minutes."  He took up the bottle again, resumed the cautious
pouring.

The tears sprang to her eyes; her lip quivered.  But sweet
reasonableness conquered again, and she perched on a high stool near the
door.  She gazed round, tried to interest herself in the certainly
extraordinary exhibits on floor and tables and shelves.  She recalled
the uses of the instruments she recognized, tried to guess the uses of
those that were new to her.  But her mind refused to wander from the one
object that really interested her in that room. Perhaps ten minutes
passed, she watching him, he watching the unchanged liquid in the test
tube.

She had been born in her father’s and mother’s prime. She had been
taught to use her brain.  Thus, underneath the romantic and idealizing
upper strata of her character there was the bedrock of good common
sense, to resist and to survive any and all shocks.  As she sat watching
her engrossed husband her love, her fairness, and her good sense pleaded
for him, or, rather, protested against her sensitiveness.  What a dear
he was!  And how natural that he should be absorbed in these
experiments, after having been away so long.  What right had she to
demand that his mood should be the same as hers?  What a silly child she
had shown herself, expecting him to continue to act as if love making
were the whole of life.  If he were to be, and to do exactly as she
wished, would she not soon grow sick of him, as of the other men, who
had thought to win her by inviting her to walk on them?  Her eyes were
sweet and tender when Dick, happening to glance seeingly in her
direction, saw her ensconced, chin on hand, elbow on knee.  "Hello,"
said he half absently.  "Good morning."

There was no room for doubt; he had completely forgotten her.  As her
skin was not white, but of delicate pale yet rosy bronze, it did not
readily betray change of emotion. But such a shock had he given her
sensitive young heart, in just the mood of love and longing to be most
easily bruised, that even his abstraction was penetrated.  He set the
bottle down.  "Didn’t I speak to you—" he began, and then remembered.
"I beg your pardon," he said, contrite and amused.

Pride always hides a real wound.  She smiled.  "I’m waiting to take you
to breakfast," she said.

He looked uncertainly at the bottle and the tube.

A wave of remorse for her thoughts swept over her. "Also," she went on,
and she was radiant again, "I’m waiting to be kissed."

He laughed, gazed lovingly at her.  "What a beauty she is, this
morning," he cried.  "Like the flowers—the roses—the finest rose that
every grew—in a dream of roses."

Her eyes at once showed that his negligence was forgotten.  Their lips
met in a lingering kiss.  He drew away, threw back his head, gazed at
her.  "Was there ever woman so lovely and fresh and pure?" he said.
With impulsive daring she overcame her virginal shyness, flung her arms
round his neck, and kissed him.  "I love you," she murmured, blushing.
"When I woke up and found you gone—it was dreadfully lonely."  She had
dropped into the somewhat babyish manner natural to any affectionate
nature in certain moods and circumstances.  It seemed especially natural
to her, on account of her size and her exuberant gayety; and she had
been assuming it with him in all its charming variations from the
beginning of their engagement because it was the manner that pleased him
best.  "Next time, you’ll wake me and take me along—won’t you?"

He patted her.  "Bless the baby!  A lot of work I’d do."

"I’m going to help you.  I can soon learn."

He shook his head in smiling negative.  "You’re going to be the dearest,
sweetest wife a man ever had," said he. "And always your womanly self."

"But," she persisted with an effort, "I can help.  I’m sure I can."
There was no trace of the "baby" in her expression now; on the contrary,
her face and her voice were those of an extremely intelligent young
woman, serious without the dreary, posed solemnity that passes current
for seriousness, but is mere humorless asininity.  "I really know
something about chemistry," she went on.  "I liked it, and took the
courses both at high school and at college. Last winter I won a prize
for original work."  His smile made her color.  "I don’t say that," she
hastened to explain, "because I think I’m a wonderful chemist, but just
to prove to you that I do know a little something—enough to be able to
help in a humble sort of way."

His expression was still that of grown people when laughing at the
antics of children, and concealing amusement behind a thin pretense of
grave admiration.  "Yes, I’ve no doubt you’re clever at it," said he.
"But a refined woman oughtn’t to try to do the man sort of thing."

"But, dear, I’m not so superfine as you seem to think—and not altogether
foolish."  She glanced round the laboratory.  "You don’t know how at
home I feel here.  What a wonderful, beautiful equipment you have!
Everything of the best—and so well taken care of!  Dick, I want to be
your—wife.  As I watched you I realized I’ve got to fit myself for it.
That is—of course, I always knew I’d have to do that—but now I know just
what I must do."

"What a serious child it is!" he cried, pinching her cheek.  It was
delightful, this baby playing at "grown-up."

She laughed because she loved him and loved laughter; but she persisted.
"Being wife to a man means a great deal more than looking pretty and
making love."

"That’s very dear and sweet," said he, in the same petting, patronizing
way.  "I’m content with you as you are. I don’t want anything more."
And he set about putting things away and locking up.

Quiet on her high stool, she struggled against a feeling of resentment,
of depression.  Her instinct was, as always, to hide her hurt; but it
seemed to her that if she did, it would not get well, would get worse.
"Dick," she began at last.

"Yes?" said he absently.  "Come along, dear."  And he lifted her down
with a kiss.

She went out, waited for him while he locked the door. "Dick," she began
again, as they walked along the path, "I don’t want to be shut out of
any part of your life, least of all out of the realest part.  I want to
be truly your wife."

No answer.  She glanced up at him; obviously his thoughts were far away.

She slipped her arms through his.  "Tell me what you’re thinking about,
dear."

"About that test I was making."

"What was it?"

"Oh, nothing.  Is the house satisfactory?  How do you like old Nanny?"
As she did not answer, he looked down at her.  "Why, what’s the matter
with my little sweetheart?  Such a discontented expression!"

"Nothing—nothing at all," replied she, forcing a smile and steadying her
quivering lip.

"I’m afraid those two days on the train——"

"Yes," she interrupted eagerly.  "And I guess I’m hungry, too.  _That’s_
very upsetting."

With a little forcing she kept up the semblance of good spirits through
breakfast and until he was off to the laboratory again.  Then she gave
way to her mood—for it could be only a mood.  With old Nanny as guide,
she went through the house, through all its spacious solidly and stiffly
furnished rooms.  At every step Nanny had something to say of Miss
Eudosia—how good Miss Eudosia had been, how Miss Eudosia kept everything
as her mother had it before her, how particular Miss Eudosia had been.
And when it wasn’t Miss Eudosia it was Colonel ’Kill—that
splendid-looking, terrible-looking old Achilles Vaughan; as a child she
had decided that the awful god the family worshiped must look like
Achilles Vaughan.  Nanny talked on and on; Courtney’s spirits went down
and down. In one respect the house should have appealed to her—in its
perfect order.  For she had inherited from her mother a passion for
order—an instinct that would have a neatly kept ribbon box almost as
soon as she could talk, and had prompted her, long before she could talk
distinctly, to cry if they tried to put on her a dress the least bit
mussed or a stocking with a hole in it.  But there is the order that is
of life, and there is the order that is of death.  This Vaughan order
seemed to her to be of death.  She felt surrounded, hemmed in, menaced
by a throng of the Vaughan women of past generations—those women of the
old-fashioned kind, thoughtless, mindless, cool, and correct and
inane—the kind of women the Vaughan men liked—the kind Richard
liked—"No—no.  He does _not_ like that kind!"

Assisted by Nanny and Mazie, she unpacked the trunks into drawers and
closets.  When the last box was empty, Jimmie took them down to the
cellar.  She was established—was at home.  She and Dick were to have the
same bedroom; he would use the big spare bedroom directly across the
hall and its bath for dressing.  It was all most convenient, most
comfortable.  But she could not get interested, could not banish the
feeling that she would soon be flitting, that she was stranger, intruder
here.  And the last sweet days of the honeymoon kept recurring in
pictured glimpses of their happiness of various kinds, all centering
about love.  How tender he had been, how absorbed in their romance—that
wonderful romance which began ideally in a chance meeting and love at
first sight.  And now, just as she was getting over her deep-down
shyness with him, was feeling the beginnings of the courage to be wholly
her natural self, to show him her inmost thoughts, o release the
tenderness, the demonstrativeness that had been pent up in her all her
life—just as the climax of happiness was at hand—here was this shadow,
this relegating her to the chill isolation and self-suppression and
self-concealment of a pedestaled Vaughan wife.  "He acts as if a woman
were not like a man—as if I had no sense because I’m not tall, and don’t
go about in a frown and spectacles."  And it depressed her still further
to recall that his attitude had been the same throughout courtship and
honeymoon—treating her as a baby, a pet, something to protect and
shield, something of which nothing but lover’s small talk was expected.
She had liked it then; it seemed to fit in with the holiday spirit.  "I
gave him a false impression.  It’s my fault."  To pretend to be
infantile for purposes of a holiday of love-making is one thing; to have
one’s pretense taken as an actual and permanent reality—that was vastly
different, and wearisome, and humiliating, and not to be permitted.
"But," she reflected, "it’s altogether my fault.  And the thing for me
to do is not to talk about it to him, but just quietly to go to work and
make myself his wife—fit myself for it."  A wonderful man she thought
him; and it thrilled her, this high and loving ambition to be worthy of
him, and not mere pendant and parasite as so many wives were content to
be.

They were to go the scant half mile across the lake in the motor boat at
noon and lunch at her old home.  She was ready a few minutes before
time, and started toward the Smoke House.  Halfway she stopped and
turned back. No, she could not interrupt him there again.  His manner,
unconscious, more impressive than any deliberate look or word, made her
feel that the Smoke House was set in an enchanted wood which she could
not penetrate until She smiled tenderly.

At half past twelve he came on the run.  "Why didn’t you telephone?"
exclaimed he.  "We’ll be scandalously late.  I’m so sorry.  When I get
to work down there I forget everything.  I even forgot I was married."

She busied herself with the buttons of her glove, and the brim of her
hat hid her face.  And such a few hours ago he and she were all in all
to each other!

"Do you forgive me?"

She thought she was forgiving him; the hurt would soon pass.  So she
gave him a look that passed muster with his unobservant eyes.  "Don’t
worry.  We’ll soon be there."

They got under way, he at the motor, she watching his back.  On impulse
she moved nearer.  "Dick," she said.  "Don’t turn round.  I want to say
something to you that’s very hard to say....  I feel I ought to warn
you.  At college the girls called it one of my worst traits. When anyone
I care for hurts me, I don’t say anything—I even hide it.  And they
don’t realize—and keep on hurting—until—  Oh, I’ve lost several friends
that way. For—the time comes—  I don’t let on, and it gets to be too
late—and I don’t care any more."

"You mean about my keeping you waiting?"

"No—not that—not that alone.  Not any one thing. Not anything at all
yet—but a kind of a shadow. Just—you’ve made me feel as if I weren’t to
be part of you—of your life.  No, I don’t say it right.  I’ve felt as if
I were to be part of you, but that you weren’t to be part of me."

He began to laugh, believing that the proper way to dispel a mood so
unreal.  But glancing at her he saw she was shrinking and literally
quivering with pain.  His face sobered.  He reminded himself that women
could not be dealt with on a basis of reason and sense, since they had
those qualities only in rudimentary form.  As his hands were occupied,
he was puzzled how to treat this his first experience with feminine
sweet unreasonableness in her. All he could do toward pacifying was to
say soothingly, as to a sensitive child: "I understand, sweetheart.  I
must be very—very careful."

"Not at all!" she cried, ready to weep with vexation at her complete
failure to make him understand.  "I’m not a silly, sensitive thing,
always trailing my feelings for some one to step on."

"No, dearest—of course not," said he in the same tone as before.  "If
there weren’t so many sail boats about, I’d show you how penitent I am."

"But I don’t want you to be penitent."

"Then what do you want?"

"I want you to—I want us to be comrades."

"What a child it is!  You girls are brought up to play all the time.
But you can’t expect a man to be like that. Of course we’ll play
together.  I’d not have wanted to marry you if I hadn’t needed you."

"But what am _I_ to do when you can’t play?" she asked.  "And I’m afraid
you won’t play very often. That is, I know you won’t—and I’m glad you
won’t—for I’d not care as I do if you were that kind.  I didn’t realize
until this morning.  But I do realize now, and—Dick, you don’t think of
me as just to play with?"

Facing her earnestness, he would not have dared confess the truth.  "No,
indeed!" said he.  "Your head’s full of notions to-day.  You’re not at
all like your sweet loving self."

She felt instantly altogether in the wrong.  "It’s the strangeness, I
guess," she said penitently.

"That’s it, exactly.  But in a few days you’ll be all right—and as happy
as a bird on a bough."

As they were about to land she mustered all her courage, and with
heightened color said: "You’ll let me come down and try to help, won’t
you?  I’ll promise not to be in the way—not for a minute.  And if I am,
I’ll never come again.  I can at least wash out test tubes and bring you
things you need."

"Oh, if you really want to come," began he, with good-humored tolerance.

"Thank you—thank you," she interrupted, eager and radiant.

"Not right away," he hastened to add.  "Just at present I’m clearing
things up."

"I understand.  You’ll tell me when the time comes."

"Yes, I’ll tell you."




                                  *II*


In late July, after he had not appeared either at dinner or at supper
for four days, she said to him, "You’re becoming a stranger."

The idea of reproaching him was not in her mind. She had been most
respectful of what she compelled herself to regard as his rights, had
been most careful not to intrude or interrupt or in any way annoy.  The
remark was simply an embarrassed attempt to open conversation—not an
easy matter with a man so absorbed and silent as he had become.  But he
was feeling rather guilty; also, he had not recovered from the failure
of an elaborate experiment from which he had expected great things in
advancing him toward his ultimate goal—the discovery of a cheap,
universal substitute for all known fuels.  "You know, my dear," said he,
"in the sort of work I’m trying to do a man can’t control his hours."

"I know," she hastened to apologize, feeling offense in his tone, and
instantly accusing herself of lack of tact. "I’m too anxious for you to
succeed to want you ever to think I’m expecting you.  I’ve been busy
myself—and a lot of people have been calling."

This, though bravely said, somehow did not lessen his sense of guilt.
"You’re not lonely, are you?" he asked gently.  And he gave her a
searching, self-reproachful look.

"No, indeed!" laughed she.  "I’m not one of the kind that get hysterical
if they’re left alone for a few minutes."  Her tone and expression were
calculated to reassure, and they did reassure.

"Really, you ought to have married a fellow who was fond of society and
had time for it.  I know how you love dancing and all that."  This, with
arms about her and an expression which suggested how dreary life would
have been if she had married that more suitable other fellow.

"I used to like those things," said she.  "But I found they were all
simply makeshifts, to pass the time until you came."

"We _are_ happy—aren’t we?"

"And just think!" she cried.  "How happy we’ll be when our real life
begins."

"Yes," said he vaguely.

He looked confused and puzzled, but she was too intent upon her dream to
note it.  "When do you think you’ll get time to teach me the ropes?"
asked she.

After a little groping he understood.  He had forgotten all about that
fantastic plan of hers to potter at the laboratory.  And she had been
serious—had been waiting for him to ask her down!  A glance at her face
warned him that she was far too much in earnest to be laughed at. "Oh, I
don’t know exactly when," said he.  "Probably not for some time.  Don’t
bother about it."

"Of course, I’ll not bother you about it," replied she. "But naturally I
can’t help thinking.  It won’t be long?"

He detested liars and lies.  Yet, looking on her as a sort of child—and
it’s no harm to humor a child—he said, "I hope not."

He blushed as he said it, though his conscience was assuring him there
was absolutely nothing wrong in this kind of playful deception with
woman the whimsical, the irrational.  "Certainly not," thought he.
"She’ll soon forget all about it.  I don’t see how she happened to
remember so long as this."  Still, it was not pleasant to tell even the
whitest of white lies, facing eyes so earnest and so trusting as were
hers just then.  He changed the subject—inquired who had been calling.
She did not return to it.  She was content; his long hours and his
complete absorption were proof of his eagerness to hasten the day when
they should be together.  "Of course," thought she, "he likes what he’s
doing—likes it for itself.  But _the_ reason is ’us.’"  And some day
soon he would surprise her—and they would begin to lead the life of true
lovers—the life she had dreamed and planned as a girl—the life she had
begun to realize during courtship and honeymoon—the life of which, even
in these days of aloneness and waiting, she had occasional foretastes
when overpowering impulse for a "lighter hour" brought him back to her
for a little while.

She had been puzzled when in those hours he sometimes called her
"temptress."  The word was tenderly spoken, but she felt an accent of
what was somehow suggestion of reproach—and of rebuke.  Now she thought
she understood.  He meant she stimulated in him the same deep longings
that incessantly possessed her; and when those longings were stimulated,
it was hard for him to keep his mind on the work he was hastening with
all his energy—the work that must be done before their happiness could
begin.  "I must be careful not to tempt him," thought she.

From this she went on to feel she understood another matter that had
puzzled her, had at times disquieted her. She had noticed that his moods
of caressing tenderness, of longing for the outward evidences of love
seemed to be satisfied, and to cease just when her own delight in them
was swelling to its fullness.  Why should what roused her quiet him?
This had been the puzzle; now she felt she had solved it: He had greater
self-control than she; he would not let his feelings master him, when
they would certainly interfere with the work that must be done to clear
their way of the last obstacles to perfect happiness; so he withdrew
into himself and fought down the longings for more and ever more love
that were no doubt as strong in him as in her.

Thus she, in her faith and her inexperience, reasoned it all out to her
satisfaction and to his glory.  She had not the faintest notion of the
abysmal difference between her idea of love and his.  With her the
caresses had their chief value as symbols—as the only means by which the
love within could convey news of its existence.  With Dick, the caresses
were not symbols at all, not means to an end, but the end in themselves.
Of love such as she dreamed and expected he knew nothing; for it he felt
no more need than the usual busy, ambitious man.  His work, his struggle
to wrest from nature close-guarded secrets, filled his mind and his
heart.

He soon assumed she had forgotten her fantastic whim, and forgot it
himself.  She often wished he would talk to her about his work, would
not be quite so discouraging when she timidly tried to talk with him
about it.  And in spite of herself she could not but be uneasy at times
over his growing silence, his habitual absentmindedness.  But she
accepted it all, as loving inexperience will accept anything and
everything—until the shock of disillusion comes. So stupefying is habit,
there were times when her dream became vague, when she drifted along,
leading, as if it were to be permanent, the ordinary life of the modern
married woman whose husband is a busy man.  She was learning a great
deal about that life from her young married friends of the neighborhood
and of Wenona.  Many of them—in fact, most of them—were husbanded much
like herself.  But they were restless, unhappy, and for the best of
reasons—because they had no aim, no future.  She pitied them profoundly,
felt more and more grateful for her own happier lot.  For she—Dick’s
wife—had a future, bright and beautiful.  Surely it could not be much
longer before he would have the way clear for the life in common, the
life together!

She fell to talking, in a less light vein than she usually permitted
herself with him, about these friends of hers to him one evening as they
walked up and down the veranda after supper.  She described with some
humor, but an underlying seriousness, their lives—their amusing, but
also pitiful, efforts to kill time—their steady decline toward inanity.
"I don’t see what they married for," said she.  "They really care
nothing about their husbands—or their husbands about them.  The men seem
to be contented. But the women aren’t, though they pretend to
be—_pretend_ to their _husbands_!  Isn’t it all sad and horrible?"

"Indeed it is," he replied.  He had been only half listening, but had
caught the drift of what she was saying. "It’s hard to believe decent
women can be like that."

"And the men—they’re worse," said she; "for they’re satisfied."

"Why shouldn’t they be?" said Dick.  "They don’t know what kind of wives
they’ve got."

"I—I don’t think you quite understood me."

"Oh, yes; you said the wives were dissatisfied.  They’ve got good homes
and contented husbands.  What right have they to be dissatisfied?  What
more do they want?"

"What we’ve got," said she tenderly.  "Love."

"But they’ve got love.  Didn’t you say their husbands were contented?
When a man’s contented it means that he loves his wife.  And a good
woman always loves her husband."

She laughed.  He often amused her with his funny old-style notions about
women.  "You can’t understand people who live and feel as they do,
dear," said she.  "Of course, you and I seem to be living much like them
just now.  But you know we’d never be contented if we had to go on and
on this way."

With not a recollection of the "whim," he stopped short in astonishment.
"What way?" he asked.  "Aren’t we happy?"

She smiled radiantly up at him in the clear, gentle evening light.  "But
not so happy as we shall be, when you get things straightened out and
take me into partnership."

"Partnership?" he demanded blankly.  "What do you mean?"

"I call it partnership.  I suppose you’d call it working for you.  I
suppose I shall be pretty poor at first. But I’ll surprise you before
I’ve been down there many weeks.  I’ve been brushing up my chemistry, as
well as I could, with only books."

It came to him what she was talking about—and it overwhelmed him with
confusion.  "Yes—certainly. I—I supposed you’d forgotten."

She gazed at him in dismay.  "Forgotten!"  Then she brightened.  "Oh,
you’re teasing me."

He began to be irritated.  "You mustn’t fret me about that," he said.

"I didn’t even mean to speak of it," she protested, her supersensitive
dread of intrusion alert.  "I know you’re doing the best you can.  But I
couldn’t help dreaming of the time when I’ll have you back again....
Now, don’t look so distressed!  Meanwhile, we’ll have what we can. And
that’s something—isn’t it?"

What queer, irrational creatures women were!  To persist in a foolish,
fanciful notion such as this!  Why couldn’t she play at keeping house
and enjoy herself as it was intended women should?  A woman’s trying to
do anything serious, a woman’s thinking—it was like a parrot’s
talking—an imitation, and not a good one.  But the "whim" and his
"harmless deception" became the same sort of irritation in his
conscience that a grain of dust is on the eyeball.  He was forced to
debate whether he should not make a slight concession.  After all, where
would be the harm in letting her come to the laboratory?  She’d soon get
enough.  Yes, that would be the wise course.  Humor a woman or a child
in an innocent folly, and you effect a cure.  Yes—if she brought the
matter up again, and no other way out suggested, he would let her come.
It amused him to think of her, delicate as a flower, made for the
hothouse, for protection and guidance and the most careful sheltering,
trying to adapt herself to serious work calling for thought and
concentration.  "But she’d be a nuisance after a day or so.  A man’s
sense of humor—even his love—soon wears thin when his work’s interfered
with."  Still, she’d be glad enough to quit, probably after a single
morning of the kind of thing he’d give her to discourage her.  "Really,
all a woman wants is the feeling she’s having her own way."

This decision laid the ghost.  As she said no more, the whole thing
passed to the dark recesses of his memory. One evening in late
September, when he was taking a walk alone on the veranda, she came out
and joined him. After a few silent turns she said, "Let’s sit on the
steps."  She made him sit a step lower than she, which brought their
eyes upon a level.  The moon was shining full upon them.  The expression
of her face, as she looked intently at him, was such that he
instinctively said, "What is it, dear?" and reached for her hand.

He had given the subject of children—the possibilities,
probabilities—about as little thought as a young married man well could.
There are some women who instantly and always suggest to men the idea
motherhood; there are others, and Courtney was of them, in connection
with whom the idea baby seems remote, even incongruous.  But as she
continued to look steadily at him, without speaking, his mind began to
grope about, and somehow soon laid hold of this idea.  His expression
must have told her that he understood, for she nodded slowly.

"Do you mean—" he began in an awe-stricken voice, but did not finish.

"Yes.  I’ve suspected for some time.  To-day the doctor told me it was
so."

Her hand nestled more closely into his, and he held it more tightly.  A
great awe filled him.  It seemed very still and vast, this moonlight
night.  He gazed out over the lake.  He could not speak.  She continued
to look at him. Presently she began in a low, quiet voice, full of the
melody of those soft, deep notes that were so strange and thrilling,
coming from such slim, delicate smallness of body and of face: "I can’t
remember the time when I wasn’t longing for a baby.  When I was still a
baby myself I used to ask the most embarrassing questions—and they
couldn’t stop me—  When could I have a baby?  How soon?  How many?  And
when I finally learned that I mustn’t talk about it, I only thought the
more.  I never rested till I found out all about it.  I came very near
marrying the first man that asked me because——"

He was looking at her with strong disapproval.

She smiled tenderly.  "I know you hate for me to be frank and natural,"
she said with the gentlest raillery. "But, please, let me—just this
once.  I must tell you exactly what’s in my head—my foolish, feminine
head, as your grandfather would have said."

"Go on, dear.  But you couldn’t convince me you weren’t always innocent
and pure minded."

"You—a chemist—a scientist, talking about knowledge being wicked!  But
I’ll not discuss those things with you. I never have and I never shall."
She drew closer to him, put one arm round his neck.  "Now do listen,
dear," she went on.  "Then—you came into my life.  It’s very queer—I
don’t understand why—at least not clearly—but from the moment I loved
you I never thought of baby again—except to think I didn’t want one."

"My dear!" he exclaimed.  He drew away to look at her.  "Courtney!
That’s very unnatural.  You’re quite mistaken."

As she did not know men, it seemed to her a unique and profoundly
mysterious case, this of him so broad-minded, scandalously broadminded
most Wenona people thought, yet in the one direction a puritan of
puritans. With a wisdom deeper than she realized she said smilingly:
"Dear—_dear_ Dick!  I guess the reason you men think women irrational is
because you’re irrational on the subject of women yourselves.  To a
crazy person the whole world seems crazy."

He did not respond to her pleasantry.  She sighed, drew his arm round
her, went on: "Well—anyhow, it’s true.  And, do you know, I think that
whenever a woman really loves a man, cares for just him, she doesn’t
want a baby."

"You’re quite mistaken," he assured her gravely. "It’s natural for a
woman to want children.  _You_ want them."

"Do _you_?"

"I?  I’ve never given it much thought."

"I did hope you’d say no," said she, half in jest. "Now honestly,
doesn’t it seem reasonable that when two people love each other they
shouldn’t want any—any intruder?"

He looked at her with more than a trace of severity in his expression.
"Where did you get these unnatural ideas?  I don’t like you to say such
things even in joke. They’re most unwomanly."

She felt rebuked and showed it, but persisted, "You must admit it’ll
interfere."

"Interfere with what?"

"With the life we’ve been looking forward to—with my helping you."

"Oh—yes—" he stammered.  Again that exasperating ghost!  What possessed
her to persist in such nonsense?

"You know it would interfere—would put off our happiness for a year or
two.  A year or two!  Oh, Dick!"

When she had the child, thought he, the ghost would be laid forever.
"Well—we’ll do the best we can," he said.  His tone and manner of regret
were as sincere as ever mother used in assuring her child of the reality
of Santa Claus.  And Courtney believed and was reconciled.

"I do want the baby," she now admitted.  "But I want you—love—more, oh,
so much more.  I’m glad your life work is something I naturally care
about.  Still, I suppose, when a woman loves a man, she cares about
whatever he is and does, and fits herself to be part of it."

He smiled with patronizing tenderness, as he often did, always evidently
quite sure she’d not understand.  If we could but realize it, how our
mismeasurements of others would enable us to study as in a mirror our
own limitations! "Wait till you have the baby," said he.

"Do you think that with me love for a baby could ever take the place of
need for love—grown-up love? You’re always making me feel as if you
didn’t know me at all, Dick."

He laughed and kissed her.  "You don’t know yourself. Wait till you have
a baby, and you’ll be content to be just a woman."

"But I’m content to be that now."

"Well—let’s not argue."




                                 *III*


Except courtship and honeymoon never had she been so happy as in the
last two months before the baby came. "Every-one is spoiling me," she
said, dazzled by the revelations of thoughtfulness and affection.  Her
friends, her acquaintances, showered attentions upon her.  Even her
mother, austere and cold, unbent.  Her father, the shy, the silent,
betrayed where she had got her silent, shy, intense longing for love.
The two sour old-maid sisters were all tenderness and chaste excitement.
As for Dick, he actually neglected his career.  Again and again he would
stop in the midst of an experiment to dash up to the house and inquire
what he could do for her—this when there was a private telephone at his
elbow.

She was intelligent about diet and exercise; so she suffered hardly at
all.  As for the baby, he came into the world positively shrieking with
health.  Finally, she had none of the petty vanity that leads many a
first-time mother into fancying and acting as if maternity were a unique
achievement, original with herself.  Thus the agitation quickly died
away, and life resumed its former course, except that she had a baby to
take care of.  At first it was great fun.  Dick helped her, forgot his
chemistry, seemed in the way to become a father of unprecedented
devotion. But this did not last long.  He loved playthings and played
with them; but the call of his career was the strong force in his life,
and he went back to the laboratory.  She might have given the baby over
to a nurse, as all the other women were doing.  But it seemed to her
that, as she was responsible for the coming of this frisky helplessness,
she could not do less than guard him until he was able to look out for
himself.  "When he can talk and tell me exactly how’s he treated when
I’m not around," said she, "why, perhaps I’ll trust him to a nurse—if he
needs one.  But until then I’ll be nurse myself."

Many and many a time in the next eighteen months she wished she had not
committed herself openly and positively.  She loved her baby as much as
any mother could—and a good-humored lovable baby he was, fat and
handsome, and showing signs of being well bred while still a speechless
animal.  But, except in romances and make-believe life, the deepest love
wearies of sacrifices, though it gladly makes them.  This baby—Benedict
they named him, but he changed it to Winchie as soon as he could—this
baby made a slave of her.  She understood why so many women retrograde
after the birth of the first child.  The temptation to go to seed is
powerful enough in the most favorable circumstances, once a woman has
caught a husband and secured a living for life.  A baby, she soon saw,
made that temptation tenfold stronger.  She wondered what it was in her
that compelled her to fight unyieldingly against being demoralized.

Dick was deep in a series of experiments that forbade him a thought for
anything else.  He did occasionally spend a few moments in mechanical
dalliance with his two playthings; but that interrupted his thoughts
little if at all. By the slow, unnoted day-to-day action that plays the
only really important part in human intimacies of all kinds, she had
grown too shy and strange with him to ask his help or even to think of
expecting it.  She did not judge him—at least, not consciously.  She
assumed he was doing the best he could, the best anyone could, the best
possible. To have complained, even in thought, would have seemed to her
as futile as railing against any fundamental of life—against being
unable to fly instead of walk.  She made occupation for herself, as will
presently appear.  But, after all, it was Winchie who saved her.  But
for him she, with no taste for "chasing about," would have withdrawn
within herself, would have become silent, cold, ever more and more like
her mother, with barren cynicism in place of Mrs. Benedict’s equally
barren religiosity.  Winchie’s spirits of overflowing health, his
newcomer’s delight in life were infectious and stimulating.  In keeping
him in perfect health—outdoors, winter and summer, and always active,
she made her own health so perfect that the cheerful and hopeful side of
things was rarely so much as obscured.

One evening after supper Richard, moved by the intermittent impulse to
amuse himself, sought her in her sitting room, where she was reading.
She always sat there in the evenings because she could hear Winchie if
he became restless.  He never did, but that fact no more freed her to go
off duty than the absence of burglars the policeman.  Dick gave her the
kind of kiss that was always his signal for a "lighter hour."  She
merely glanced up, gave him the smile that is a matrimonial convention
like "my dear," and went on with her book.  Theretofore, whenever he had
shown the least desire to take an hour off from that career of his, she
had instantly responded.  She assumed this readiness meant love; in
fact, love had no part in it. She responded for two reasons, both
unsuspected by her: because she did not know him well enough to have
moods with him and to show them, and because refusal would have been
admission of the truth of indifference to him which she had not yet
discovered.  That evening, for the first time, she did not respond.  It
was unconscious on her part, unnoted by him; yet it was the most
significant event in their married life since the wedding ceremony two
years and a half before.

He stood behind her and began gliding his fingers over the soft down at
the nape of her neck.  It has become second nature to women to repress
their active emotions, no matter how strong, and to wait upon the man—an
evidence of inferior status that is crudely but sufficiently disguised
as "womanly delicacy and reserve."  In response to the signal of those
caressing fingers Courtney mechanically put up her hand and patted his.
Her gesture was genuinely affectionate—but there had been a time when it
would not have been mechanical.  She did not lift her eyes from the
page.

"Is that a good love story?" asked he.  "As good as ours?"

A tender little smile of half absent appreciation played round her lips.
But—her glance remained upon her reading. "It isn’t a novel," replied
she.  "It’s a treatise."

"A treatise?" mocked he.  "Gracious me!  What a wise fairy it is!  Put
it away, and let’s go on the balcony. There’ll not be many more sit-out
nights."

He moved to pick her up in his arms.  But she smilingly pushed him away.
"I want to finish this chapter," said she.

"All right.  I’ll go out and smoke.  Don’t be long."

And he sauntered through the window door.  After perhaps a quarter of an
hour she joined him in the hammock.  Matrimony is a curious fabric of
set phrases, set thoughts, and set actions.  It was their habit, in such
circumstances, for her to snuggle up to him and for him to put his arm
round her.  The habit was on this occasion observed.  It was her habit
to assume that she was happy—and she now so assumed.  He began the
conversation. "I’ve been watching you as I sat here," said he lazily.
"What are all those books on the table?  They look
serious—businesslike."

"Let’s not talk about anything serious.  You always laugh at me or get
absent-minded."

"But you seemed so absorbed.  What was it?"

"Oh, I’ve been doing a little reading and thinking and studying for the
past year.  You see, when a woman takes care of a baby, she’s got to
look out or she’ll become one herself."

"But you are a baby."  And there followed the usual caresses.

"Not a real baby," said she.  "We both act like children at times—very
little children.  But we’d not care for each other as we do if either of
us were really infantile.  It takes a grown person to play baby
attractively."

"Baby," he insisted fondly.  He was smiling with the masculinely
patronizing tolerance to which she had grown so used that she never
noted it.  He appreciated that she was clever—with the woman sort of
cleverness—bright, witty, sometimes saying remarkably keen things.  But,
being a man, he knew that man mind and woman mind are entirely
different—never so different as when woman mind seems to be like man
mind—just as purely instinctive actions of animals seem to display
profound reasoning power. "And what was the baby wrinkling its brow
over, in there? The care and feeding of infants?"

"Dear me, no," replied she with perfect good humor. "I went into that
before Winchie came.  You think it’s all a joke—my reading and studying.
But the real joke is your thinking so.  You must remember I can’t afford
to let myself go, as you do."

He had been chiefly absorbed in caresses and caressing thoughts.  At
this last remark he laughed.  "Now, what does that mean?" he inquired.

"You’ve given up everything for chemistry.  Haven’t you noticed that we
can hardly talk to each other—that you can hardly talk to anybody?"

"I never did have much talent for small talk."

"But I didn’t mean small talk.  You care only for chemistry, know only
chemistry.  You never did know or care much about literature or art or
music or any of the worth-while things except just your own specialty.
And you can afford to be that way.  It’s your career, and also you’re
not a woman and a mother."

He had stopped caressing her.  "I confess I don’t understand," said he
stiffly.

"A man can afford to be narrow—not to know life or the world.  But a
mother—if she’s the right sort—has to try to know everything.  She’s got
to bring up children—and how can she hope to teach and train
successfully if she doesn’t know?"

"I don’t agree with you," said he, a certain curtness in his voice.  "A
woman must be pure, innocent, womanly—as you are.  Nature didn’t make
her to be learned or wise—to think.  She has her instincts to keep her
straight, and a father or a husband——"

"Dick—Dick!" she cried, patting him on the cheek. "What an old fogey it
is!  You talk like—like an ordinary man.  How bored you’d be if you had
that kind of wife—one who couldn’t be comrade and companion, and didn’t
want to be—one who was merely a mistress."

Vaughan was sitting bolt upright now.  "Those books in there—  Courtney,
you’re not reading impure, upsetting books?"

She laughed delightedly.

"What are those books?" he insisted.

"They’re—now, Dickey dear, please don’t be shocked—they’re on landscape
gardening and interior decoration."  She looked up at him mischievously
in the starlight.  "Are they womanly enough to suit you?"

"Yes, indeed," said he heartily.  "But I might have known you’d not read
anything a good woman oughtn’t.  I love you as you are—and I’d hate to
see you changed, my spotless little angel."

She submitted to his caresses.  And presently, in that brain which he
would have thought it absurd to look into except for the very lightest
kind of amusement, there formed the first really disloyal thought she
had ever permitted to be born.  The thought was: "Dick certainly does
take himself terribly seriously.  If it weren’t Dick, I’d say he was
getting to be a prig."  She was instantly shocked at herself, as one
always is at the first impulse to doubt the idol one has set up for
blind worship.  She felt there was but one way to prevent the recurrence
of such perilous blasphemy. After a brief silence she said in a
constrained voice: "Dick, I was not a stupid, incurious fool as a girl,
and I went to college, and I’m a wife and a mother.  If by innocence you
mean ignorance, I’m anything but innocent."

She saw that he was highly amused.

"Women," she went on earnestly, "always tell each other that before men
it’s wise to pretend to be ignorant and too refined to know life, and to
be shocked at everything. They say it pleases men.  But I’m sure you’re
not that sort of man.  Anyhow, I can’t be a hypocrite."

"That’s right, dear," said he, nodding approvingly, the amused smile
lingering.  "Go on with your interior decoration and landscape
gardening.  You can’t learn too much about them."  He was leaning back
again, secure, comfortable, happy, enjoying the sensation of caressing
her.

She gave it up, as she always did when she found herself being ruffled
by that strange antiquated prejudice of his.  It would yield in time.
Besides, what did it really matter?—since they loved each other, and
would be happy once their real life got under way.  "I’d have taken up
chemistry," she continued, "but one can’t go far alone in that, with
only books.  And you wouldn’t help me.  I’m afraid you’ll find me very
rusty when I come down to the laboratory next spring."

His lips were open to inquire what she meant, when he was unpleasantly
spared the necessity.  Out of a dark recess of memory sprang the
ghost—the "whim."  He was astounded, irritated, alarmed.  He had
supposed he had heard the last of that silly notion about helping him;
she hadn’t spoken of it in nearly two years.  Now—here it was again!

"Dick," she was saying, her hand clasping his, "I’ve appreciated your
not speaking of it, or even talking about what you were doing.  If you
had, the delay’d have been much harder to bear.  For, as long as Winchie
needs me, I simply can’t come."

"I understand, dear," said he, much relieved.

"It’s a dreadfully long delay, isn’t it?" she went on, dreamily gazing
up into the great quiet sky.  "The more I see of married people, and the
more I think about married life, the clearer I see that two must have a
common interest, a common career, or they drift apart, and usually the
woman sinks down and down into a gadabout or a fat frump or a
professional minder of other people’s business—a gossip or a charity
worker."

If she had been looking, even in that faint light she could have seen
his expression of gathering displeasure.

"Or else," she went on, "she seeks love elsewhere. Isn’t it strange,
Dick, how in unhappy marriages the so-called good women are the bad
ones, and the so-called bad ones good?  I mean, when a weak woman finds
herself married wrong she accepts it and gently rots, and people say
she’s a good soul, when she’s really degrading herself and rotting
everybody round her.  While a strong woman—one that’s worth
while—refuses to be crushed, and people call her bad.  But then I’ve
begun to think life’s like one of those exhibitions where some cut-up
slips round and changes the labels so that everything’s named wrong."

She was talking along lightly, talking what seemed to her the plainest
common sense, and was all unconscious that she had brought him and
herself where both were almost peering into the abyss between them.  He
was sitting up, was getting ready to deliver himself.  Her next remark
checked him.  "Thank Heaven, Dick, you and I are going to have the
interest that makes two lives one—makes it impossible to grow apart.  It
seems to me I can’t wait for Winchie to release me so that I may come
and work with you.  Aren’t you glad I really, naturally, like chemistry,
and already know something about it?"

He winced, and instead of speaking, put his cigar between his opened
lips.

She leaned her head affectionately against his arm.  "I feel close to
you to-night—feel that we’re in perfect sympathy.  Sometimes—I—I don’t
feel quite that way.  Of course I know it’s all right, but I get—afraid.
It’s such a long, long delay—and your work absorbs you—and we almost
never talk as we’re talking to-night.  There have been times when—-I’ve
almost—been afraid _we_ were drifting apart."

"What nonsense!" he cried sharply.  "How could that be?  Do you suppose
I don’t know you’re a good woman?  You talk foolishly at times—things
you’ve picked up from loose people.  But you are a lady and a good
woman."

She saw he was for some unknown reason irritated. She swiftly changed
the subject.  "Anyhow, dearest, we shan’t be in danger much longer.
We’re nearly to the end of the life we’ve been leading ever since we got
back from our wedding trip.  Just think—ever since then!  How time has
gone!"

He stirred uncomfortably, ventured: "We’ve been happy, and, even if
things were to go on just as they are, we’d continue to be happy."

"Of course, you’ve had your work and I’ve had Winchie, and once in a
while we have each other.  But most of the happiness has been in looking
forward, hasn’t it?"

She assumed that his silence was assent.

"But don’t think, dear," she said, "that I’ve been content just to wait.
As soon as I saw it was going to be a long time before I could come to
the laboratory——"

He rose abruptly, under the pretense of lighting a fresh cigar.

"—I made another occupation for myself.  It’ll be next spring at the
earliest before I can come to you.  And even then I’ll be able to spend
only part of the day. Winchie’ll have to be looked after when he’s not
at the kindergarten.  Now that he’s talking and understanding, it’s more
necessary than ever to watch over him.  I’ve had to watch only his body.
Now it’s both his body and his mind; for, if any harm came to either,
it’d be our fault, wouldn’t it?"

"There’s no doubt of that," said Dick with strong emphasis, as he seated
himself in a chair opposite her.  He thought this remark of hers opened
the way out of his perplexity.  "I don’t see how you can come to the
laboratory at all."

"Oh, yes.  It’s not so bad as that.  If it were, I don’t know what I’d
do.  It’d be choice between losing you and neglecting him."

"Trash!" exclaimed Dick impatiently.  There seemed something essentially
immoral in her whole attitude, an odor of immorality exuding from
everything she said.  It exasperated him that he could not locate it and
use it as the text for the lecture he felt she greatly needed.  "Your
good sense must tell you there’s not the slightest danger of your losing
me."

She laughed with raillery.  "Oh, I know you’re far too busy with your
chemistry to wander.  But that isn’t what I meant.  You understand."
Her eyes shone upon him. "Sometimes—when we’re holding each other tight
and your lips are on mine—I can scarcely keep from crying. It seems to
me we’re like two held apart and trying to be one—and trying in vain.
It’s as if we touched only at the surface, and our bodies were keeping
us from each other. But all that will soon end now, and we’ll be really
one. Closer and closer, day by day——"

She sat on his lap, and he clasped her in his arms.  He felt ashamed
somehow, and in awe of this emotion that was beyond him.  "How wonderful
a pure woman is!" he thought.

After a pause she sat up, went back to the hammock, seated herself,
leaning toward him.  "But I started to tell you my plans."

"What plans?" he asked, in high good humor with her again and
overflowing with "lighter-hour" tenderness. "Tell me quick and we’ll go
in.  It’s getting late."  He moved to seat himself beside her.

"No," she said, laughingly.  "Sit where you are.  I want you to listen.
It isn’t often I can get you to listen. As I said, I’ve got to have
something worth while to fill in as I look after Winchie when he’s not
at kindergarten. I’ve been getting ready for a year, and it has given me
occupation when he was sleeping or playing, for I taught him to amuse
himself and not to look to me for everything. That was good for him and
saved me.  Well, I studied gardening and interior decoration."

"What a fuss you do make," said he, amused.  "Why not just settle down
and be a plain woman?"

"Shame on you!  Tempting me to go to pieces."

"You’ll not improve on the good old-fashioned woman, my dear."

"You deserve to be married to one of them."

"I am," declared he.  "Your whims don’t deceive me. I know you.  Let’s
go in, dear."

She shook her head in smiling reproach.  "Then you don’t care to hear my
plans?"

"Oh, yes.  What are they?"

"I’ve got everything ready to make those changes we discussed on our
honeymoon."

"Really!" exclaimed he, seeing that enthusiasm was expected, though he
hadn’t the remotest idea what she was talking about.

"Of course, I’m going slowly at first, as I want to be sure, and mustn’t
be extravagant.  I’ve been very careful. I’ve made drawings and even
water colors, for I thought I ought to see how things would look."

He was puzzled and alarmed.  "I don’t believe I know which scheme you
mean," he said.  "We discussed so many things on that trip."

"I mean, to change the house and grounds," explained she with bright
enthusiasm.  "They’ll not be ugly and stiff and cold looking much
longer."

He started up.  "Courtney, what are you talking about?" he demanded.

"Why, Dick!  Don’t you remember?  I told you some of my ideas on gardens
and interiors, and you said——"

"I don’t know what careless, unthinking remark I may have dropped,"
interrupted he angrily.  "I certainly never intended to let you tear
things up and make a mess."  He walked up and down.  "What possesses you
anyhow?" he cried.  "Why can’t you behave yourself like a woman?  I
never heard of such nonsense!  I want you to stop meddling in things
that are beyond you.  I want you to do your duty as a wife and a mother.
I want you to stop annoying me.  I didn’t marry a blue-stocking, an
unsexed thinking woman.  I married a sweet, loving wife."

She sat on the edge of the hammock, perfectly still.  It was as if he
had struck her unconscious so suddenly that she had not yet fallen over.

"What devil keeps nagging at you?" he demanded, pausing in his angry
stride to face her.  "It must be some woman’s having a bad influence on
you.  I’ll not have it. I’ll not have my home upset and my wife spoiled.
Who is it, Courtney?"

She was silent.

"Answer me!"

"It’s myself," replied she in a quiet, dumb way.

"It’s not yourself.  _You_ are womanly."

"I’ve got to have something to do—something worth while—or I can’t
live."

"Attend to your house and your baby, like all true women."

"It isn’t enough," replied she in the same monotonous, stupefied way.
"It isn’t enough for me, any more than it’d be for you."

"Nonsense," said he, with the man’s feeling that he had thereby answered
her.

She said dazedly: "You didn’t mean it.  No, you didn’t mean it."

"Mean what?"

"All my plans—my year’s work—and such a beautiful house and place I’ll
make."  She started up, clasped her hands round his arm.  "O Dick—don’t
be narrow—and so distrustful of me.  I know I can do it.  Let me show
you my plans—my sketches——"

He took her hands, and said with gentle, firm earnestness, for he was
ashamed of having lost his temper with a woman: "Courtney, I cannot have
it.  I will not let you disturb the place my grandfather gave his best
thought to."

"But you don’t like it, dear," she pleaded.

"I respect my grandfather’s memory."

"But on our wedding trip you said——"

"Now, don’t argue with me!"

"It’s because you think I couldn’t do it?"

"I know you couldn’t—if you must have the truth."

"Let me show you my sketches and paintings," she pleaded, in a queer
kind of quiet hysteria.  "Let me explain my plans.  I’m sure you’ll——"

"Now, Courtney!  I’ve told you my decision.  I want to hear no more
about it."

She looked up into his face searchingly.  He was like the portrait of
his unbending grandfather that made the library uncomfortable.  Her arms
fell to her sides.  She went to the balcony rail, gazed out into the
black masses of foliage.  Taken completely by surprise, she could not at
once realize any part, much less all, of what those words of his
involved; but she felt in her heart the chill of a great fear—the fear
of what she would think, of what she would know, when she did realize.

His voice interrupted.  "While you’re on the unpleasant subject of these
notions of yours," he said, with an attempt at lightness in his
embarrassed tone, "we might as well finish it—get it out of the way
forever.  I want you to stop thinking about the laboratory."

She turned, swift as a swallow.

"I admit I’ve been at fault—encouraging you to imagine I’d consent.  But
I thought you’d forget about it. Apparently you haven’t."

A long silence.

"I repeat, I’m sorry I misled you.  It seemed to me a trifling
deception."

She did not speak, did not move.

"When you think it over, you’ll see that I’m right—that we’re much
happier as we are."

After a long silence, which somehow alarmed him, though he told himself
such a feeling was absurd, she crossed the balcony to the window.  As
she paused there, not looking toward him, the profile of those sweet,
irregular features of hers stood out clearly.  That expression, though
it was quiet, increased his absurd alarm.  "It’s getting late," she
said, and her tone was gentle, apologetic. "I think I’ll go in."

"Are you angry, Courtney?"

"No," she replied.  "I don’t think so."

"Why are you silent?"

"I don’t know," she said slowly.  "I seem to have stopped inside."

He went and put his arms round her.  She was passive as a doll.  "Why,
you’re quite cold, child!"

"I must go in.  Good night."

"I’ll join you in a few minutes."

She shivered.  "No," she said.  "Good night."

He was somewhat disconcerted.  Then he reflected that she could hardly
be expected to give up her whims without a little struggling.  "It shows
how sweet and good she is," thought he, "that she took it so quietly."
And he went to bed in the room across the hall—the room he had been
occupying most of the time since three months before Winchie came.  As
he fell asleep he felt that he had laid "the ghost" and had settled all
his domestic affairs upon the proper basis.  He slept, but she lay awake
the whole night, watching, tearless, beside her dead.




                                  *IV*


Next morning, after her usual breakfast alone, she took Winchie and went
across in the motor boat to her father’s. If she had been led blindfold
into that house she would have known, from the instant of the opening of
the door, that she was at home.  Every home has its individual odor.
Hers had a clean, comfortable perfume suggestive of lavender.  She
inhaled it deeply now as she paused a moment in the front hall—inhaled
it with a sudden sense of peace, of sorrow shut out securely.  She left
the baby in the sitting room with her sister Lal, and sought out her
mother in the pleasant old-fashioned back parlor with its outlook on the
hollyhocks and sunflowers of the kitchen garden. Mrs. Benedict, a model
of judicial sternness, as her husband was of judicial gentleness, sat
reading a pious book by the open window.  She glanced up as her daughter
entered, and prepared her cold-looking cheek for the conventional
salute.  But Courtney was in no mood for conventions. She seated herself
on the roll of the horsehair sofa. "Mother," she said, "I want to talk
to you about Richard."

The tone was a forewarning—an ominous forewarning because it was calm.
Mrs. Benedict, for all her resolute unworldliness, had been unable to
live sixty-seven years without there having been forced upon her an
amount of wisdom sufficient to store to bursting the mind of any woman
half her age.  She closed the heavy-looking book in her lap, leaving her
glasses to mark the place.  "I don’t think I need tell a daughter of
mine that she cannot discuss her husband with anyone."

Courtney flushed.  "That’s just it," replied she.  "He is no longer my
husband."

She was astonished at her mother’s composure.  An announcement about the
weather could not have been less excitedly received.  She did not
realize how plainly she was showing, in her changed countenance, in
stern eyes and resolute chin, the evidences a mother could hardly fail
to read—evidences of a mood a sensible mother would not aggravate by
agitation.  "I cannot live with him," she went on.  "I’ve brought
Winchie and come home."

Her words startled herself.  In this imperturbable, severely sensible
presence they sounded hysterical, theatrical, though she had thought out
the idea they conveyed with what she felt sure was the utmost
deliberation.  Her mother’s gray-green eyes looked at her—simply looked.

"I know you don’t believe in divorce, mother.  But he and I have never
been really married.  He’s entirely different from the man I loved.  And
he—  What he feels for me isn’t love at all.  He doesn’t know me—and
doesn’t want to know me."

"Has he sent you away?"

"Oh, no.  _He’s_ satisfied."

Mrs. Benedict folded her ladylike hands upon the pious book, said coldly
and calmly: "Then you will go back to him."

"Never.  I refuse to live with a man who classes me with the lower
animals.  I——"

Her mother’s stern, calm voice interrupted.  "Don’t say things you will
have to take back.  You will return because there is no place else for
you."

"Mother!  Do you refuse to take me and Winchie? Oh, you don’t
understand.  You—who believe in religion—you couldn’t let me——"

"Your father," interrupted her mother in the same cold, placid way, "is
not to be made judge again.  We shall have to give up this house and
retire to the farm.  We have nothing but the farm.  It will take every
cent we can rake and scrape to pay the insurance premiums.  The
insurance premiums must be paid.  The insurance is for your sisters.
They have no husbands."  And with these few bald statements she stopped,
for she knew that under her daughter’s youthful idealism there was the
solid rock of common sense, that behind her impetuosity there was her
father’s own instinct for justice.

"The farm," said Courtney, stunned.  "The farm."  Twenty miles back in
the wilderness—a living death—burial alive.  "Oh, mother!"  And the girl
flung herself down beside the old woman and clasped her round the waist.
"You shan’t go there!  I’ll go back to Richard and we’ll see that you
and father and Lal and Ann stay on here."

Her mother was as rigid as the old-fashioned straight-back chair in
which she sat.  The blood burned brightly in the center of each of her
white cheeks, but her voice was distinctly softer as she said: "You will
go back.  But we accept nothing from anybody."

Courtney hung her head.  "Of course not," she said, hurried and
confused.  "I spoke on impulse."

"You’d better sit in a chair," said Mrs. Benedict.  "You are rumpling
your dress."

But Courtney was not hurt.  She had an instinct why her mother wished
her to sit at a distance.  "Very well, mother," said she meekly, and
obeyed.

After a pause Mrs. Benedict spoke: "I was not surprised when you told
me.  I suppose there is not one woman in ten thousand who doesn’t at
least once in the first five years of her married life resolve to leave
her husband."

"But it’s different with me.  I must have something—and I have nothing."

"You have your home and Winchie."

"That house—those prim, dressed-up looking grounds—they’ve always
oppressed me.  And I hate them—now that—"  She checked herself.  How
futile to relate and to rail.  "As for Winchie, he’s not enough."

"There will be others presently."

Courtney gave her mother a horrified look.

"You will do your duty as a wife, and the children will be your reward."

Courtney could not discuss this; discussion would be both useless and
painful.  "There may be some women who could be content with looking
after a house and the wants of children," said she.  "But I’m not one of
them, and I never saw or heard of a worth-while woman who was. How am I
to spend the time?  I’m like you—I don’t care for running about doing
inane things.  I can’t just read and read, with no purpose, no sympathy.
It seems to me I could do almost anything with love—almost nothing
without it....  Brought up and educated like a man, and then condemned
to the old-fashioned life for women—a life no man would endure!"

Her mother was looking out through the window, a strange expression
about her stern mouth—the expression of one who, old and in a far, cold
land, thinks of home and youth when the sun warmed the blood and the
heart.

"What shall I do if I go back?" repeated Courtney. "But why ask that?
I’ve simply got to go back.  As you say, there’s no place else for me."
A flush of shame overspread her cheeks.  "Oh, it’s so degrading!"

"You forget Winchie," said her mother, and her tone was gentle.

"No, I thought of that excuse.  But I was ashamed to speak it.  It
seemed like hypocrisy.  Of course, I’ve got to go back for his sake.
But if I hadn’t him I’d go back just the same.  Mother, you ought to
have had me educated more or else less.  If I knew less I could be
content with the sort of life women used to think was the summit of
earthly bliss.  If I knew more I could make my own life. I could be
independent.  I begin to understand why women are restless nowadays.
We’re neither the one thing nor the other."

Up to a certain point Mrs. Benedict could understand her daughter, could
sympathize.  She could even have supplemented Courtney’s forebodings as
to the future with drearier actualities of experience.  But beyond that
point the two women were hopelessly apart.  "You are warring with God,"
she rebuked.  "He has ordained woman’s position."  And to her mind that
settled everything.

"It isn’t God," replied Courtney.  "It’s just ignorance."

"It is God," declared her mother, in the fanatic tone that told Courtney
her mind was closed.

The mother and daughter belonged to two different generations—the two
that are perhaps further apart than any two in all human history.
Courtney saw how far apart she and her mother were, thought she
understood why her mother could sympathize with her restlessness in
woman’s ancient bondage, but could only say "sacrilege" when the younger
and better educated woman went on from vague restlessness to open
revolt.

"God has seen fit to make the lot of woman hard," said the mother.

"If that is God," cried the daughter, "then the less said about Him the
better."

"Courtney, your sinful heart will bring you to grief."

"Is it a sin to think?"

"I sometimes believe it is—for a woman," replied the mother, with the
kind of bitter irony into which the most reverent devotee is sometimes
goaded by the whimsical cruelties of his deity.

Courtney had long since learned to be unargumentative before her
mother’s somber and savage religion, so logical yet so inhuman.  She had
dimly felt that if she ever investigated religion, the misery of the
world would compel her to choose between believing in her mother’s devil
god and believing nothing.  So she left religion aside in her scheme of
life, like so many of the men and women of her generation.

"I ought to have had more education or less," she repeated.  "I ought to
have had more, for it wouldn’t have been fair to give me less than the
rest of the girls have."

She fancied it was her formal education of the college that had made her
think and feel as she did.  In fact, that had little, perhaps nothing,
to do with it; for colleges, except the as yet few scientific
schools—stupefy or stunt more minds than they stimulate.  She was simply
a child of her own generation, and the forces that were stirring her to
restlessness were part of its universal atmosphere—the atmosphere all
who live in it must breathe, the "spirit of the time" that makes the
very yokel with his eyes upon the clod see things in it his yokel father
never saw.

She knew her mother would gladly help her, but she realized she might as
hopefully appeal to Winchie.  All her mother could say would be: "Yes,
it is sad.  But the only thing to do is to return and pretend to be the
old-fashioned wife, and perhaps custom will make the harness cease to
gall."  Well, perhaps her mother was right; perhaps there was no
solution, no self-respecting hopeful solution.  Certainly she could not
support herself, except in some menial and meager way that would more
surely kill all that was aspiring in her than would submission to the
lot which universal custom made abject only in theory.  She could not
support herself—and there was Winchie, too. Winchie had his
rights—rights to the advantages his father’s position and fortune gave.
Dick had made it clear that he did not and would not have the kind of
love, the kind of relationship, she believed in.  She must go on his
terms or not at all.

She ended the long silence, during which her mother sat motionless in an
attitude of patient waiting for the inevitable.  "I will go," she said.
"And I will try to be to him the kind of wife he wants."

Mrs. Benedict looked at her daughter; there were tears of pride in her
eyes.  "That is right," she said, and they talked of it no more.

But on the way back in the motor boat, and for the rest of that day, and
for a good part of many a day and many a night thereafter, Courtney
Vaughan’s mind was stormily busy.  It teemed with the thoughts that in
this age of the break-up of the old-fashioned institution of the family
force themselves early or late upon every woman endowed with the
intelligence to have, or to dream of, self-respect.


Thenceforth Dick Vaughan, if he had thought about it at all, would have
congratulated himself on his wise and thorough adjustment of his
threatened domestic affairs.  But he gave no more thought to it than
does the next human being.  We do not annoy ourselves with what is going
on in the heads of those around us.  We look only at results.  And
usually this plan works well; for, no matter what the average human
being may have in mind, the habit of a routine of action ultimately
determines his or her real self.  Once in a while, however,
circumstances interfere, encourage the latent revolt against action’s
routine apparently so placidly pursued.  But this is rare.

The weeks, the months went by; and Courtney seemed, and thought herself,
a typical "settled" wife and mother. That is, as "settled" as an
intelligent, energetic, and young woman, restless in mind and body,
could be.  She did not attempt to come to a definite verbal
understanding with him.  What would be the use?  There was nothing to
change except herself.  There was nothing to explain. She understood
him.  He did not understand her, did not wish to, could not on account
of his prejudices, however carefully she might explain.  "No," thought
she, "the only thing is for me to accept my position as woman and adapt
myself to it, since I haven’t the right, or the courage, or the whatever
it is I lack, to do as I’d like."  The only outward difference in their
relations was that she rarely talked with him, and when he was about,
fell into his habit of abstraction.

That winter he became extremely irregular about coming to dinner, and as
the days lengthened with the spring he often worked on through supper
time also.  In late May or early June he began to note that when he did
come up to the house for supper, his wife was sometimes there and
sometimes not.  Gradually her absence made an impression on him, and her
always answering his inquiry with, "I was over at the club."  As that
meant the Outing Club, established and supported and frequented by the
young people of Wenona and its suburbs, he was entirely satisfied.
This, until about midsummer.  One evening, when she returned in the dusk
from supper at the club, she found him seated on the bench at the
landing stage, smoking moodily.  He was scantily civil to Shirley
Drummond, who had brought her in the club launch.  When Shirley was well
on the way back to the north shore, Courtney, who had seated herself
beside her husband, spoke of the heat and unwound the chiffon scarf
about her bare neck and shoulders.  Dick glanced round.  In some moods
he would not have seen at all.  In other moods those slender shoulders,
that graceful throat, and the small head with its lightly borne masses
of auburn hair would have appealed to his pride and joy of possession.
But things had gone wrong at "the shop," and he was in the mood that
could readily either turn him to her for the consolation of a "lighter
hour" or set him off in a rage.  He frowned upon the exposed shoulders.

"Where did you get that dress?" he demanded.

She heard simply the question.  Her thoughts were on the events of the
evening at the club.  "Had it made here," said she, unconscious of his
mood.  "It’s something like one I saw in a fashion picture from Paris.
Like it?"

To her amazement he replied angrily: "I do not.  I’ve never seen a dress
I disapproved of so thoroughly.  Don’t wear it again, and please be
careful how you adopt a fashion you get that way.  French fashions are
set by a class of women I couldn’t speak to you about.  Respectable
women have to alter them greatly."

"Why, what’s the matter with the dress?" exclaimed she.  "Everyone
admired it at the club."

"It isn’t decent," replied he.  "I know you are so innocent that you
don’t think of those things.  But it’s my duty to protect you.  I won’t
have men commenting on my wife’s person."

"But, Dick," protested she, "this isn’t a low-cut dress. It’s higher
than those I usually wear.  It has bands across the shoulders and a real
back——"

"Then change all your dresses.  You must not make yourself conspicuous."

"Conspicuous!  The other women wear much lower-cut dresses than I do."

"I know about such things," said he peremptorily. "I don’t believe in
low-neck dresses anyhow.  What business has a good woman flaunting her
charms—rousing in other men thoughts she ought to rouse in her husband
only?"

"Don’t you think it’s all a matter of custom?" she said persuasively.
She was not convinced, or even shaken.  But she admired the shrewdness
of his argument.  The reason she had never grown to dislike him was that
even in his prejudices he was always plausible, and not in his narrowest
narrowness was he ever petty.  "Now really, Dick, if that were carried
out logically, a woman’d have to cover her face and not speak, for often
it’s a woman’s voice that charms a man"—with a little laugh—"and once in
a long while what she says."

"I would carry it out logically," replied he promptly, "if I had my way.
That reminds me.  You’re away from home very often these days, I notice.
You’re over at the club a great deal."

"The weather’s been so fine, everybody goes."

"I’ve no objection to your going occasionally.  But after all the place
for a good woman is at home."

She thought so too, as a general principle; home undoubtedly was the
place for a good woman, or any sort of woman, or for a man; that was to
her mind the meaning of home—the most attractive, the most magnetic spot
on earth.  However, the Vaughan place was not "home."  She could not
discuss this with him, so she simply answered, "But I get bored—here
alone—and with nothing to do.  And nobody’ll come at this time of year,
with something on at the club every day and evening."

"You don’t even stay home to meals."

"Neither do you."

"But I haven’t Winchie to look after."

"He plays with the other children at the kindergarten. And Miss
Brockholst can keep a child amused as I couldn’t. When I stay out to
supper I see that Nanny or Lizzie brings him home and puts him to bed.
And I’m not out to supper often."

"I don’t like it," said Dick imperiously.

"You ought to come with me," rejoined she.  "But you never will."

"I’ve no time for foolishness.  And I’m sure you haven’t either."

"What ought I to do with myself?"

"What other good women do.  Our mothers didn’t hang about clubs."

"No.  But these aren’t pioneer times.  Things are entirely different
nowadays.  That was why—"  She did not finish.  She did not wish to
remind him how he had refused to let her either share his life or make a
life of her own.  She refrained because the subject might be unpleasant
to him.  It was no longer unpleasant to her; she now had not the least
desire to share his life, was in a way content to drift aimlessly along
with the rest of the aimless women.

"Yes, many of the women are different nowadays," said he.  "The more
reason for my wife’s conducting herself as a woman should."

She flushed with sudden anger.  "Why can’t you accept a woman as a human
being?" exclaimed she.  "Oh, you men—tempting—compelling—us to be
hypocrites—and making our natural impulses rot into vices because they
have to be hid away in the dark."

"We will not quarrel," said he, in the calm superior tone he always took
when their talk touched on the two sexes.  "I simply say I will not
tolerate my wife’s being a club lounger."

To have answered would have been to say what must precipitate a furious
and futile quarrel.  She kept silent, with less effort than many women
would have to make in the circumstances.  She had had the conventional
feminine training in self-suppression, that so often gives women the
seeming of duplicity and only too often imperceptibly leads them into
forming the habit of duplicity.  She had also had special training in
self-concealment through having been brought up austerely.  She kept
silent, and made up her mind to obey.  She had heard much talk among the
women at the club about the "rights of a wife"; but it had not convinced
her.  She could not see that she, or any other of the women married as
was she, contributed to the family anything that entitled her to oppose
the husband’s will as to how it should be conducted.  And she would have
scorned to get by cajolery what she could not have got honestly.  She
was thus the good wife, not through fear of him, for she was not a
coward and he was not the sort of small tyrant that makes the women and
the children tremble; nor was it because she was faithful to her
marriage vows, for she never thought of them.  Her submissiveness was
entirely due to the agreement she had tacitly signed the day she went
back to him, after the talk with her mother.  In return for shelter and
support she would be, so far as she could, the kind of wife he wanted.


She kept away from the club, stayed at home; and soon the telephone bell
was ringing, and pleading voices were giving the flattering proof that
in her abrupt divorce from the social life of the town the sense of loss
was by no means altogether on her side.  And presently over came Sarah
Carpenter escorted by her big handsome brother, Shirley Drummond, "as a
committee of two," so Sarah put it, "to investigate and report on your
cruel and inhuman treatment of us."  It was dull, frightfully dull, at
the club house, she went on to explain.  They did nothing but sit round
and try to guess why Courtney Vaughan had dropped them.  "And have you
forgotten the flower show you were planning? and the play you were going
to organize? and the Venetian fête?"

"Oh, that was just talk," replied Courtney.  "It’s far too hot.  I’m
resting, and looking after my boy.  I’ll be over some afternoon soon."

Sarah pleaded and coaxed.  Shirley took no part, but sat on the veranda
rail, his long legs swinging, his eyes on the interior of the straw hat
he was turning round and round between his hands.  When Sarah realized
that there was unalterable resolution under Courtney’s light and gay
laughing off of her entreaties, she bade Shirley wait there for her and
went to call on Molly Donaldson.  Courtney looked admiringly after
Sarah’s long willowy figure and striking costume—sunshade and hat, dress
and stockings and ties, all of various cool, harmonious shades of red.

"Your sister always was pretty," said Courtney.  "But since she’s
married it seems to me she gets prettier all the time."

"Marriage does bring out those women that don’t go to pieces," said he.
"I guess it’s because they get the courage to be more like themselves.
Girls are such hypocrites—always posing.  You were the only one I ever
liked.  You weren’t a hypocrite.  Where you didn’t dare be yourself you
simply kept quiet."

"I like your impudence—attacking women for being what you men compel."

"Maybe so," said he absently.  "But I didn’t come over here in the hot
sun to talk generalities.  Look here, Courtney, there’s something I’ve
got to say to you."  His good-humored commonplace face was even redder
than the heat and his bulk—for he wasn’t a thin man—warranted.  His
voice was low and confused, yet suggested a man talking against a mob
and determined to be heard.  "I’ve got to tell you that I care for
you—and have ever since we used to walk from high school
together—whenever some other fellow didn’t slip in ahead of me."

Courtney, puzzled, rapidly reviewed her conduct toward Shirley the past
two months—since he came home from Harvard Law School.  She recalled
nothing that could have given him encouragement to this speech.  "I
should hope you did like me," she said carelessly.  "Of course, we’re
good friends, as always."  She rose.  "Let’s go over to Donaldson’s."
Her tone and manner contained the subtle warning to desist that reaches
through the thickest skin into the dullest brain.

"You know what I mean," said Shirley doggedly. "Now listen to me while I
make a proposition.  You’re a sensible, up-to-date woman, and this is
the twentieth century, not the dark ages.  I’m not as clever as some,
but neither am I as much the muttonhead as maybe you think.  Anyhow, I
appreciate you."

"Drop it," said Courtney.

"I want you to get a divorce and marry me."

He spoke as tranquilly as if they were at a dance and he were asking her
for the next two-step.  She stared. "Well, I never did!" she exclaimed.

"I see you’re surprised," said he.  "I’ve thought about it so much that
I’ve got used to it."

"This is something new—a woman getting proposals after she’s married,
just as if she wasn’t."  She was laughing.

"Why not?" retorted he, unruffled.  "Nobody looks on marriage as the
finish any more.  I don’t think you love me—not for a minute.  You’ve
got better brains than I have—a lot better, for I’ll admit I’m pretty
slow.  But you’ve tried brains and you see they don’t amount to much
when it comes down to solid living.  You don’t love me now.  But,
Courtney, if you’ll marry me, I’ll guarantee to treat you and the
youngster so that you’ll simply _have_ to love me."

She was slowly recovering from her utter amazement, when he spoke those
last words in his simple, honest way with his love in his voice, in his
eyes—love that makes bright the dullest face, quickens into bloom the
barrenest fancy, puts sweet music in the most tedious voice.  Her words
of rebuke dropped back unsaid, her throat choked up and tears welled
into her eyes.  While she was still trying to control this sudden
treachery of her hungry heart, he went on: "I was away to college when I
heard you were engaged.  I cut exams, and everything and rustled out
here.  But I saw you were dead in love.  It nearly knocked me out.  Then
it occurred to me that marrying’s only a trial go and that in a few
years I might get you and you’d be all the better for the experience."

What he said did not shock her.  But she was shocked that she was not
shocked.  Still, it isn’t easy to meet a wholly new form of attack; and
less easy is it to be stiff and stern with a person one has known always
and liked always—a person one knows to be through and through sincere
and profoundly respectful.  "Shirley," said she, "you mean well and you
are slow—so, you don’t realize that what you’ve said is perfectly
outrageous."

"Why?" demanded he.  "Is it an insult to a woman to tell her you love
her?  Is it a crime to let her know that, if she isn’t suited, there’s
some one waiting to try to help her get suited?  Where’s the outrage?"

"I don’t know just where," admitted she.  "But I feel that it is an
outrage—that you’ve taken advantage of our friendship."

"On the contrary, I’ve shown I _am_ your friend; ready to stand by you.
I haven’t laid a finger on you, and, so help me God, Courtney, I
couldn’t try.  I’m that old fogey, at least.  And I haven’t tried to
wheedle or win you—have I?  I just made a plain statement that if you
want me, I’m waiting—and eager.  I’ve seen how things are with you——"

"You’ve seen nothing of the kind!"  Her pride and her loyalty were in
arms now.

He looked at her with eyes that were as honest as an open sky.  "You
don’t love your husband, nor he you," he said.  "If you did, you’d not
see as little of each other as you do."

"Shirley, it’s cowardly to say those things," she began angrily.

"Oh, I’d say ’em to him, if it wasn’t that I’m afraid you’d have to
suffer for it.  You needn’t get mad.  I’ve been so damn miserable this
past week, not seeing you, that I don’t care what happens to me.  I know
why you don’t come over any more.  He’s shut you up here.  I saw it in
his face that night."

"It was about time he stopped me, I see," said she quickly.  "Evidently
he understood better than I did.  But you mustn’t go away thinking I’m
obeying a jailer.  Do you suppose I’d stay here at the request of a man
unless I cared for him?"

"Certainly," replied he.  "A right sort woman’ll put up with most
anything to avoid a row.  You needn’t try to fool me, Courtney.  I
know—everyone knows—the truth."

"The truth!" cried Courtney.  "How dare you sit there insulting me!"

"Now, Courtney!" begged he.

"Go join your sister and take her back without coming here."

She felt she ought to leave him; but her hungry heart would not let her
go.  She lingered, looking at him angrily, watching the utter love in
his countenance—and enjoying it.  He slowly dropped from the veranda
rail and faced her.  His look was that same mingling of gentle and
fierce qualities that makes a bulldog’s face fascinating.  "If I’ve said
anything I shouldn’t, I beg your pardon," said he.  "But I stick to my
proposition.  You can take it or leave it—now, or next year—or whenever
you like.  It’s you or nobody for me."  He put out his hand.

She clasped her hands behind her.  But she had to lower her head that he
might not see—"and misunderstand"—her swimming eyes, her trembling lip.

"Please shake hands," he begged.

She shook her head.

"That hurts," said he shakily, and she turned hastily away.  "But," he
added, "I’m used to hurts."

He lingered, embarrassed.  At length, with a huge sigh, he descended
from the veranda and plodded across the lawn toward the hedge.  She
darted upstairs and shut herself in her room and cried, lying on the bed
face down.  She felt guilty; would not the right sort of woman have been
able to meet such talk from a man, even a Shirley Drummond, with
effective fiery resentment?  But she knew it was not her guilt that she
was weeping for.  No, her tears were flowing from the wounds in her
heart—the wounds she had thought healed.  She had not the faintest
feeling in the least akin to love for Shirley Drummond.  She never could
love him.  She had always avoided him as far as her instinct against
hurting people’s feelings permitted.  His grotesque proposal, in itself,
appealed only to her sense of humor.  But at the mere sound of loving
words, words of considerate tenderness, how her whole being vibrated!
It terrified her, this heart of hers suddenly and fiercely insurgent.


The next evening after supper she interrupted Dick in the library.
"Richard," she said gravely, "I want you to come upstairs with me a few
minutes."

"Certainly," said he.  "Directly."  And he worked on—and would have
continued to work until bedtime had she not insisted.

"No.  Right away, please."

He glanced up.  Her eyes prevented him from returning to his
calculations.  "All right," said he.

Her sitting room was changed into a painting and drawing exhibition.  On
the walls, on tables, on sofas and chairs, and leaning against the
baseboard were pictures and plans of interiors and of gardens, many in
colors, more in black and white, most of all in ground-plan drawings.

"What’s this?" said he.

"You were right about my going to the club too much," replied she.  "I
shall stay at home more.  But I _must_ have something to occupy me.
These are my plans for making over the house and grounds.  Please don’t
try to stop me. I am going to explain it all to you, and I ask you to be
considerate and polite enough to listen."

Her manner was compelling; the exhibit was interesting. And he looked
and listened as she talked, rapidly, intensely, yet clearly and calmly,
describing the whole scheme in minutest detail, not forgetting expense
which she demonstrated would be small.  He asked several
questions—enough to show that he was giving his attention. When she
finished she was trembling all over.  He continued to inspect the water
colors that showed how things would look when the changes had been made.
After a while he smiled and nodded at her.  "Very clever," he said.
"Really, I had no idea you could do anything like this."

Her mouth and throat were dry; her eyes gleamed. She was giving out the
force that flows from a soul in desperate earnest—the force that sweeps
away any opposition not already aggressive, before it has a chance to
gather. "I may try it?" she asked.

"That’s another matter," reflected he aloud.  "I ought to say no, for
I’m sure you’ll be disappointed and your mistakes’ll have to be covered
up."  Now that he was reminded of it he was ashamed of the curt
ill-humored way he had issued his orders about her going to the club.
"But you can only learn by trying.  So, I’ve no objections to your
making a start."  He laid his hands on her shoulders.  "A little at a
time—remember!" he cautioned.  "A _very_ little."

With that unconsciousness of her being intelligent enough to see his
thoughts in his expression—an unconsciousness to which she had long
since got used, but never hardened—he was showing that he wished to
refuse her, but that, being taken by surprise, he in his kindness of
heart could not frame a pretext.  His manner took from her all desire or
ability to thank him.  "I’ll be careful," said she.

The smile in his eyes was like a parent’s at a precocious child.  He
kissed her, patted her cheek, went back to his work.  He had read the
anthropologies, all written by men.  Anthropology being out of his line,
he accepted as exact science the prejudice and baseless assertion and
misleading "statistics" there set down as "laws."  Nature had made man
active, woman passive; thus, action in woman was contrary to nature, was
inevitably abortive and whimsical, was never, except by rare accident,
valuable.  "She’s clever," thought he, by way of finis to the subject.
"But she’ll soon tire of this thing and drop it.  Well, I suppose a few
more years’ll wash away the smatter she got at college, and this
restlessness of hers will yield to nature, and she’ll be content and
happy in her womanhood.  A few more children would have an excellent
effect.  She’s suffering from the storing up of the energy that ought to
have outlet in childbearing.  As grandfather often said, it’s a dreadful
mistake, educating women beyond their sphere. But it hasn’t done the
dear child any permanent harm. She’s far too womanly."




                                  *V*


By the time Winchie was four years old—and in looks and health, in
truthfulness and self-reliance a credit to her—she had about completed
the transformation of house and grounds.  The Vaughan place was no
longer an example of those distressing attempts to divorce beauty from
its supreme quality, use, that are the delight of the unfortunates whose
esthetic faculty has been paralyzed by the mediæval monastic education
still blighting the modern world.  It was, throughout, beauty applied to
use, use achieved in beauty.  She had no theory in doing this; she
followed the leadings of a courageous and unspoiled taste which was
thoroughly practical, as practical as that of the artists of the age of
Pericles, a taste which abhorred the bizarre and the blatant.  The
results would not have pleased Colonel Achilles; they would not have
stirred the enthusiasm of anyone who has been enslaved by false
education to admire only what has been approved by tradition.  But charm
no one could have denied.  Winter and summer the house, livable and
restful in every corner, bloomed within—for over no other part of nature
is man’s dominion so complete as over the plant kingdom.  From early
spring through the last warm days of autumn the grounds were delightful
to behold; it was as if summer were living there freely and at ease,
with no restraint upon her except keeping her clear of the restraint of
her own profuse and careless litter.  In winter the lawns and clumps and
hedges were by no means dead or filled only with evergreen’s mortuary
suggestions; there are many plants that bloom with bright berries and
leaves in the midst of snow and ice, and Courtney knew about them.
Winter indoors seemed a millennium in which winter and summer lived
amicably together.  There were snows and icy storms without, huge open
fires within; the windows were gay with blossoming plants, and from a
conservatory she built and stocked at surprisingly small cost there came
cut flowers for vases and bowls as well as plants that replaced those
which had done service and needed rest. Courtney was one of those for
whom things grow; her own vivid life seemed to radiate throughout her
surroundings and infect all things with the passion to live vividly.
With the flowers, as with Winchie, she was patient, intelligent,
understanding—never expecting too much, always encouraging to the least
disposition to develop.

All this wonder of transformation was not wrought in a day, nor by
dreaming.  It came as the result of tireless and incessant labor of
brain and hand.  She had dreamed her dream; she was determined that it
should be realized. Failure did not daunt her; it taught her.  Nor was
she halted by her sense, rather than experience, of a latent reluctance
in Richard about giving her money he wanted for the laboratory; for, as
his work there expanded, its expenses grew rapidly heavier.  She did not
ask him for the money; she did not let him know she needed it; she got
along without it.  In such work as she was doing it takes a vast deal of
thought, of planning and contriving, to take the place of money.  She
did that necessary thinking.  When she could get a little money, she
spent it to amazing advantage; when she could not, she went on without
it.  Some of her most satisfying results came through the work made
necessary by lack of money.  Very powerful, too, was the influence of
this upon her character—in developing self-reliance and self-respect
which come only through successful independent action.

Now, after nearly three years of days of toil that was also play, since
she loved it, she saw, but a short distance ahead, a time when she would
have little to do beyond taking care that Jimmie and Bill kept the
grounds up, and that Nanny and Mazie and Lizzie did their work properly
in the house.  There would be minor changes, new features; but the task
as a task was almost done.  And, in spite of Nanny’s opposition, she had
put the household on a systematic basis, so that with a little daily
attention every part of the routine went smoothly, each servant doing
his or her share of the work in the same way always and at the same
time.  She was about to have many hours each day liberated—and this, in
a quiet place, where time refuses to take wings, but insists upon being
definitely employed every moment of it.

What should she do next?  She had grown through her work.  She had
educated her originality and her instinctive good taste, had educated
them so intelligently that originality had not lost its courage nor good
taste its breadth. It had not "settled" her to make a home, as it
"settles" a human or lower animal that acts largely from instinct and
example and that conceives a home to be chiefly a place to eat and
sleep.  On the contrary, it had unsettled her the more.  Her character
had not changed.  Character never does change; it simply develops,
responding to its environment like any other growing thing.  Her
character had developed.

What next?  What should she do to occupy hand and brain, now grown far
more skillful?  What should she do with heart?  It was now grown far
bolder in its dreams and longings; and from time to time it was giving
ever more imperious notice that not much longer would it be content with
solicitude about a child and makeshift interest in interior decoration
and landscape gardening, but would demand its right to the fullness of
experience.  She temporized with these ominous threatenings.  She hoped
there would be more children—for children would compel her.  From
Richard, the absorbed, the well pleased with his "settled, womanly
wife," she expected nothing—and wished nothing.  The routine of
matrimony had become as unconscious as breathing or winking.  Her sense
of moral obligation to him was also automatic; she felt its restraint
not definitely as the wife of a certain Richard Vaughan, but generally
as a woman of the married estate. She knew little about him beyond what
he thought of her, of marriage—and that knowledge killed all further
interest in him.  He knew nothing whatever about her beyond the
surface—her physical charm, enhanced by good taste in dress.  The
comfort of his home and its order, the surprising success of her
"tinkerings" with house and grounds made small impression upon him.  The
changes had come about gradually; and he was absorbed at the Smoke
House.  Before the next change was made he had got used to the one
preceding, and had come to regard it as something that had always
existed.  And she was not one of those who see to it that they get full
credit by preceding, accompanying, and following every act with blast of
trumpets.  She did things because she liked to do them, just as she
learned because she liked to know.  She worked without friction or
bluster.  Also, having dismissed him from her inner, her real life, as
he had dismissed her from his, it never occurred to her to talk to him
about herself—and her work was herself.

What next?  She often asked the question as she paused to look about her
and saw so short a distance ahead the end of her task.  But she was not
troubled because she could not answer the question.  She waited with a
certain confident tranquillity until an answer should be imperative.
Meanwhile—  One look at her was enough to convince that her lot had been
better than the lot of the gay, discontented young married women of
Wenona society who pitied her because of her solitude.  They did not
realize that not only were they unhappy, but also were without the
capacity to enjoy happiness if it should offer, had lost the capacity as
utterly as a deaf man the capacity to enjoy music.  One may abuse
intellect or heart with impunity no more than body.  Transgression and
punishment are simply cause and effect.  There were times when Courtney
wished she could be gayer; but at least she was never bored, never did
the things that do not amuse in the doing, and have an aftermath of
disgust.  She had an intense, ever intenser desire to live life to its
uttermost limits of interest and joy; but that did not seem to her to
mean changing her clothes many times a day, rushing from house to house,
from party to party, gossiping, eating indigestible sauces and desserts,
and playing bridge. She knew what she did not want.  She did not know
what she wanted—did not dare inquire.  She feared life was a good deal
of a cheat—not altogether a cheat, not by any means—but still a raiser
of longings it had no way to satisfy, of expectations it had no way to
fulfill.

She fancied herself little changed since her marriage. And she was
hardly changed at all physically.  But in mind she was a woman full
grown—a rarity indeed in our civilization which tends to make odalisques
and parasites out of the women it does not crush under toil.  She was
ready for a strong part in life, should opportunity offer. Meanwhile,
she was living her placid routine with the originality and interest with
which intelligence can invest the humblest, the most usual acts.

She wrote in her commonplace book this sentence:

"Love is a tune we whistle in the dark of our aloneness to keep up our
courage."


In Winchie’s fourth year, in the spring, Judge Benedict had an illness
so severe that Courtney went to the farm, taking Winchie with her to
stay until the crisis passed.  It was nearly three weeks before decision
for life was rendered and she could return home.

She had been gone during what ought to have been her busiest season.
She rather expected to find the place in some confusion.  Instead, so
far advanced toward completion were her plans, and so thoroughly had she
trained Jimmie and his son Bill and the house servants, everything was
well under way.  All her instructions, both those given before she left
and those written to Jimmie from her father’s—had been carried out
exactly.  They had worked as hard as if she had been there, had done it
because they loved her—for only love can arouse and inspire the sluggish
energies of those who serve.  The lawns were trim and freshly green, the
walks were covered with new tan-bark; and its red brown harmonized with
the colors of lawn and trees as its odor harmonized with the odors from
the grass and the foliage, from the brilliant flowers in great beds at
either side of the house.  All the windows were gay with boxes of
blooming plants.  Railings of verandas and balconies were draped with
mats of budding creepers. The gardens—the beds in the lawns and along
the verandas—the edges of walks and drives—the thickets and
trellises—all were blossoming and odorous.  Lovely contrasts of light
and shade, delicious perfumes, birds flashing to and fro, singing in the
trees and bushes—the Vaughan place illustrated what Pope meant when he
called landscape gardening nature plus a soul.  The soul that had given
form to nature’s color and perfume was Courtney’s.

As the carriage drove down the deeply shaded main drive from highway to
drive-front porch, she gazed round with a creator’s pride and joy and
love.  She had two children—Winchie and this lovely place.  All the
servants gathered to welcome her—all except old Nanny, who had never
forgiven and who resented the changes as sacrilege.  They watched
eagerly for signs of approval.  Her expression, as she looked at what
they had done, then at them, the unsteady voice in which she said
"Beautiful—beautiful" went straight to their hearts.  Within the house,
everywhere open wide to June’s enchantment, there was evidence of the
same creative impulse—order without stiffness, art without any trace of
art’s labor.

Winchie would go straightway to look at his rabbits; she went upstairs
alone to bathe and change after the dusty journey, telling Lizzie to
bring him as soon as he had satisfied himself that his rabbits were all
right.  The door of the bedroom immediately across the hall from hers
stood open, and with the thorough housekeeper’s instinct she glanced in.
It was the room Dick usually occupied. Instead of Dick’s belongings she
saw, spread about, toilet articles and clothing strange to her.  She
entered.  On the bureau she instantly noted a pair of tasteful silver
and ebony brushes; the monogram was "B.G."  She opened a drawer;
neckties, more attractive than any she had ever seen, filled two
compartments to overflowing with their patterned silks and linens.  In
the third compartment several dozen line handkerchiefs; the monogram on
them was again "B.G."

She opened the nearest closet.  On forms hung perhaps a dozen coats; she
recognized the cut and materials as foreign.  Beneath was a long row of
boots, shoes, pumps, slippers, all of the kind a woman of taste at once
knows and appreciates.  As she was closing the door there swung out from
the hook high up a suit of beautiful striped linen pajamas monogramed in
gray and faintly perfumed with lavendar.  She went on into the adjoining
front room—the room Dick had used as a study.  Obviously, he no longer
used it.  The books of fiction and poetry—the big silver cigarette
box—the gaudily trimmed silk dressing gown flung carelessly on a
chair—none of these belonged to him or suggested his studious and rather
Spartan temperament.

In the hall she saw Lizzie just come with Winchie. "Who’s in these
rooms?" asked she.

"Mr. Gallatin," replied Lizzie.  "Mr. Vaughan put him in here and moved
down to the suite at the Smoke House."

Lizzie’s tone indicated that she was assuming Courtney knew all about
Mr. Gallatin.  That tone put her on guard. "When did he come?" asked
she, feeling her way.

"Two weeks ago yesterday.  He’s very nice.  He’s as particular as you
about his things, but it’s a pleasure to look after them."

Had Richard forgotten to tell her he expected this Mr. Gallatin?  Or had
she, fallen long since into his absent-minded habit, failed to hear as
he told her?  Was it a chance visit from some college or scientific
acquaintance? The character of the stranger’s installation—the quantity
of clothing—did not speak for a brief chance visit.  The quality of the
clothing, the taste, the care, the worldly interest and knowledge it
suggested, were all against the idea of "B.G.’s" being a devotee of
science.  At least, if there were such scientists, this was the first
she had known of it.  After she had changed for the evening, and had
given Winchie his supper and sent him to bed, she went into the
stranger’s quarters again.  These personal belongings of his attracted
her; they so clearly revealed taste and refinement, a refinement unusual
in a man; they so strongly hinted a personality more in sympathy with
her own passionate joy in life than with Richard’s intellectual
abstractions.  In the early days of their married life Richard had been
rather particular about himself; but he had got more and more
indifferent, no longer shaved every day, was at times distinctly
slovenly.  "B.G. is a bachelor," thought she.  "Married men—except those
that are at heart bachelors—soon lose this sort of gloss."  Usually she
had not the faintest interest in anything concerning Richard.  But this
man interested her.

She was in the sitting room downstairs, playing and singing in an
undertone when Richard came.  "Hello," said he.  And he kissed the cheek
she turned to a reachable angle.  His manner was as casual as hers.  It
was their habitual manner, and long had been.  The difference between
his habit and hers was that his yielded from time to time to the
intermittent gusts of desire, while hers remained always tranquilly
cool.  "Your father’s quite all right again?" was his careless first
question.

"I hope so.  I think so."

He was not merely looking at her now, he was seeing her.  His eyes
lighted up and into his voice came the wooing note.  "Glad you’ve not
dropped into my sloppy ways," said he.  He was admiring her pale-green
chiffon dress that left the slender column of her throat bare and her
forearms, but almost concealed her shoulders.  "Gallatin won’t think
we’re altogether barbarians here.  He dresses for supper.  He’s at it
now."

His eyes showed that he was not thinking at all of Gallatin, but of
her—thoughts which did not leave her entirely indifferent, but gave her
an unwonted sense of vague distaste, after her long absence and complete
freedom. As he moved toward her she said: "There’s time for you to
dress.  And you need a shave badly.  Is he from the East?"

"From Philadelphia by way of Pittsburg.  He’s been doing a little
chemistry in his amateurish way in the mills there.  I’d not have him
about if I didn’t need his money."

Dick was coming on toward her again.  "The bell will ring in ten
minutes," she reminded him.  Perhaps through perverseness, the impulse
to evade was a little stronger.

But he came, put his arms round her, kissed her again, this time with
undivided attention.  She lost the impulse to evade, submitted, smiled
amicably, and, to extricate herself, rose.  The lines of her dress
brought out the perfection of her small, slim figure; its color
harmonized with her deep-sea eyes and with the delicate bronze of her
skin. "What a beauty you are!" he exclaimed.  "No wonder I’m so proud of
you."

Usually she was indifferent, without being conscious of it; this evening
of her return from freedom to married life she felt her indifference.
She said coldly, "If you’re going to dress——"

"A shave’ll be enough," protested Dick.  "Your finery’ll more than make
up for my absence of it.  Bachelors like Gallatin have to sleek
themselves up.  They’ve still got their brides to win."

"You’ll be late."

"I want you to be extra civil to Gallatin.  He’s likely to get bored in
this quiet place after a few months.  He’s rather gay, I imagine.  At
least he used to be.  And I don’t want him to pull out."

"After a few months," repeated Courtney, interested. "Why, how long is
he to stay?"

"A year or so—perhaps longer."

"Here in the house!"

"I can’t put him down at the laboratory, so near my secrets.  I’m not
going to let him in on everything.  That’s part of our bargain.  We’re
partners, you understand."

"Here in the house!" exclaimed Courtney again.  The very idea of an
outsider as spectator at what was going on there made her acutely
conscious of it, all in an instant.

"Oh, you’ll like him—at least, you must for my sake. He doesn’t amount
to much, but he’s agreeable—well mannered—good family—entertaining in a
light way."

"There goes the bell."

Dick rushed away to shave.  He had been gone but a few moments when
Courtney was roused from her agitated reverie by the sense of some one
in the room.  Near the threshold stood the newcomer, who was to be a
factor in her intimate life, a spectator of it, whether she willed or
no, for "a year or so—perhaps longer."  He was a blond young man, fair
and smooth of skin, his hair almost golden. He certainly was not
handsome; only his coloring and a pair of frank gray eyes saved him from
downright homeliness. As their eyes met, his heavy, conventional face
was suddenly transformed by as charming a smile as she had ever seen.
He was of about the medium height, his figure neither powerful nor weak.
He wore a dinner suit of dark gray, fashionably draped upon him, pumps,
gray socks that matched his gray silk tie, a plaited French shirt, an
unusually tall, perfectly fitting collar.  If he had not been so well
and so tastefully dressed, he would have attracted no attention
anywhere—unless he had smiled.  That smile meant a frank nature, a kind
and generous heart—rarities to make their possessor distinguished in
whatever company.

Courtney, with woman’s swift grasp of surface details, noted all this
and more while she was advancing with extended hand and saying, "Mr.
Gallatin, is it not?"

He was obviously confused and embarrassed.  Her natural,
self-unconscious manner encouraged him candidly to explain.  "I feel
very shy," said he, speaking with a strong Eastern accent, "and very
guilty.  Shy because, before I came, I had somehow got the impression
Vaughan was not married—and that we were to keep bachelor hall.  I was
astonished to find he had a wife."  His eyes added without impertinence
that he was amazed and dazzled now that he saw the wife.  "I feel
guilty," he went on, "because I seem to be thrusting myself in upon you.
But Vaughan assured me I’d not be intruding."

"You needn’t trouble yourself about that," said she. She liked his
accent; it was pleasant as a novelty, and rather amusing.  She liked his
manners.  They were of the best type of conventional manners, the type
affected by fashionable people everywhere, the type that is excelled
only by the kind of manners of which it is an artful and insincere
imitation—the simple manners of those rare self-unconscious people who
have the courage—or, rather, the lack of fear—to be natural and
spontaneous.  "We’ll not wait for Richard," she said, as the supper bell
rang.  "He’s got a great deal to do before he can come."

She had just finished the sentence when he entered, exactly as he was
when he went out.  "I forgot I’d taken all my razors down to the
laboratory," he explained.

During supper he and Gallatin talked chemistry; that is, he talked and
Gallatin listened—listened and ate. Courtney noted—with increased liking
for him—that he had a vigorous appetite and that he liked the things
they had to eat.  But her thoughts soon wandered away to her gardening,
to retouching her plans for bringing the grounds a little nearer her
ideal than they had been the summer before.  When the men lighted
cigars, she went to the veranda to stroll up and down in the moonlight.
She forgot everything unpleasant in the delight of being home again.  As
she looked about her, her heart was singing the nightingale’s song.  She
was startled—and her heart’s song was stopped—by the newcomer’s voice.
"Vaughan’s gone to the library," said Gallatin.  "Do you mind if I walk
with you?"

She did mind very much indeed.  She had somehow lost interest in him as
soon as he ceased to be the mystery B.G.  She liked him well enough,
admired his manners, his really delicate tact in what must have been for
him an extremely difficult position.  But she had got the impression
that Dick was right in estimating him as a "don’t-amount-to-much."  And
just now he was distinctly a kill-joy.  However, she acquiesced
courteously, though with no unnecessary cordiality.  She felt that now
was the time to get him in the habit of respecting her privacy; she
could establish a barrier now, where an attempt to establish it later on
would offend him.  At best, the barrier would be a poor enough
makeshift; he would be bound to see, to make her feel uncomfortable
about things she had been able to keep unconscious of or indifferent to.
Still, she was far too generous to blame him.

"Do you have much spare time?" she asked, her manner more cordial than
if she had not been wishing him out of the house.

"A great deal.  Vaughan realizes I’m only an amateur."

"I’ll take you over to the club and introduce you. You’ll find some very
agreeable people."

"Thank you.  It has been rather dull these two weeks—especially of
evenings."

"I don’t see how you had the courage to come."

"I had to," said he, in the curt way in which a young man gives himself
the pleasure of hinting a secret he cannot with good taste give himself
the pleasure of telling.

She glanced across the lake at the twinkling lamps of the town.  "The
women over there will fill every minute you give them," said she.  "You
see, most of our men are busy all day and tired in the evening.  You’ll
be a lion."

"That sounds attractive.  I’m amazed at the West.  I had no idea
civilization was so advanced."

The implied condescension in this amused her.  But she merely said: "Oh,
I guess the same sort of people are much alike the world over."

The conversation languished through a to her tiresome discussion of
differences of accent, dress, manners, and such trifles until he
happened to say: "This place of yours here was a revelation to me.  I’ve
been talking to Vaughan about it—admiring it.  He tells me his
grandfather’s responsible for it.  He must have been an extraordinary
man."

"He was," said Courtney, in a queer voice.  She glanced out over her
creation and the blood burned in her cheeks.

"He’d certainly be proud of the way you keep it up."

Her sense of humor had come to the rescue; besides, vanity was not a
dominating emotion with her who had too much else to think about to have
much time for thought of self.  "I’m fond of gardening," was her placid
noncommittal reply to his compliment.

"Yes, Vaughan’s grandfather must have been a wonder," Gallatin went on
reflectively.  He had paused, was leaning on the rail, looking out over
the lawns and gardens.  "I don’t mind confessing to you—if you’ll not
tell your husband—that I’m a chemist only by profession, with landscape
gardening as my real passion."

Courtney glanced at him with interested eyes.

"I know a little something about it," he continued. "I learned long ago
in a general way that a personality is always revealed in any work, and
I at once looked for the personality in this place.  That old man must
have been an artist....  I can’t reconcile these grounds with the
portrait of him in the library."

Courtney was smiling to herself.  A thrill of pride and pleasure was
running through her.  She began to like Basil Gallatin, to feel that he
was by no means commonplace, but a man of breadth and artistic instinct,
something at least of the man of the big world, not merely the man of
the little world of well-cut manners and clothes.

"That portrait is of a stern, narrow man—strong but conventional," he
went on, confirming her more sympathetic judgment of him.  "This
place—the house as well as the grounds—shows a very different
individuality.  It’s feminine and sensuous and poetical.  Yes, it’s
distinctly feminine—and delightfully disdainful of the conventional—of
everything and anything ’cut and dried.’  I don’t mean the details—the
things you’re probably responsible for—and they’re very charming.  But I
mean the whole conception—so free, so daring, and so lovely.  Yet
Vaughan tells me that the old gentleman made the plans himself and
superintended their carrying out.  It’s very curious.  Don’t you think
so?"

"I hadn’t thought about it."

"You’re not interested?"

"Why do you say so?"

"Your tone.  I suppose a man is tedious when he gets on his hobby.  I
noticed you were bored when we were talking chemistry at supper."

"I wasn’t bored.  I simply wasn’t listening."

"You don’t like chemistry?"

"I did.  But my enthusiasm cooled as I got interested in other things."

Again the conversation languished.  She suspected that his opinion of
her was rapidly declining.  But some instinct withheld her from making
any effort whatever to rehabilitate herself.  Finally he said: "Well, I
guess I’ve disturbed you long enough.  I’ll go to my room and read."

"I’m going up myself after I’ve had a little talk with Nanny about the
house."

As soon as he disappeared, she dismissed him from mind with a few
pleasant and friendly thoughts—"he may not have any great amount of
brains or force, but he certainly has good taste.  He will be a distinct
addition."  When she ascended to her sitting room, perhaps an hour
later, she halted on the threshold, coloring with anger.  Dick was
seated at her center table reading a newspaper; Gallatin was inspecting
the books in one of her cases.  Dick saw her and said: "Come in.  Don’t
mind us."

Courtney, struggling against her anger at this climax to the impudent
intrusion upon her privacy, remained upon the threshold.

Dick’s eyes had dropped to his paper.  "Gallatin," he went on, "was
complaining that the books in the library were too old and solemn.  So I
brought him here.  I knew you’d laid in a stock of the frivolous kinds
that grandfather wouldn’t have tolerated.  Finding what you want, old
man?"

When Dick’s speaking warned him that Courtney had come, Gallatin had
startled guiltily and had hastily put away the book he was examining.
But he didn’t turn round until Richard directly addressed him.  His face
was red and his eyes were down.  "I feel sleepy," said he awkwardly.
"I’ll look again some other time if Mrs. Vaughan will let me."

"Certainly," said Courtney, cold as a flower blooming in the heart of a
block of ice.

The case into which Gallatin had been delving was filled with works on
landscape gardening and interior decoration—modern works.  As he almost
stumbled from the room he cast a further glance round at the walls—walls
covered with the original plans, sketches, and paintings Courtney had
made for her revolution in house and grounds—very modern-looking
drawings all, and unmistakably feminine. She knew that the newcomer had
her secret—all of it—not merely the secret of her authorship, but also,
through it, the secret of this loveless married life in which the
husband had not the remotest idea who his wife was or what she had done.
In passing her on his way out, Gallatin visibly shrank and grew as white
as he had been red.  She went to the window to compose herself, for her
blood was boiling in the greatest rage of her life.

Richard went to close the door after Gallatin, then turned on her.  "My
dear," said he in his "grandfather" tone, which sometimes amused and
sometimes angered her, "you are so cold by nature that you don’t realize
it, but you were almost insulting to Gallatin."

"I hope so!" cried she, facing him.  "How dared you bring him in here
without my permission?  There are not many women who would have accepted
quietly your bringing him to this house to live without a word to me. I
wish you to understand you cannot thrust him upon my privacy.  I don’t
allow anyone in this room without my consent.  It must not occur again."

"Now—now—my dear," said Dick soothingly.  "All that is very
unreasonable.  Of course, I have the right to do as I please in my own
house, and you’re too good and too sensible a wife to dispute it."

"I do dispute it!" she cried, her bosom heaving. "This room is—_me_!"

"What a tempest in a teapot!  Child, what has made you take such a
sudden dislike to him—and so violent?  He isn’t worth it—an amiable,
well-meaning, commonplace chap.  Really, you mustn’t act this way.  I’ve
told you I need him, and you must be polite to him."

"The impertinent, prying——"

"I brought him here, Courtney," he interrupted, magisterially.  "And I
repeat, I had the right to do so."

Like most people of sweet and even temperament, she lost all control of
herself in this unprecedented rage, where those in the habit of raging
learn a sort of etiquette of bad temper.  "You had not the right!" she
declared, her eyes blazing into his.  "And if you ever do such a thing
again, I’ll make it impossible for him to remain here.  Do you
understand?"

"I do not quarrel," said Richard with gentle superiority, "especially
not with women—with my wife."

"And why not?  You call it chivalry.  I call it contempt.  And I detest
it.  If you could appreciate how absurd you are, with your antiquated
notions of superior and inferior sex, of rights and duties, and all such
nonsense!"

Richard was in full armor of masculine patience against feminine folly.
"You are beside yourself, my dear.  I’ll leave you until you are calm
and courteous."  And he added, as if he were meting out severe but just
punishment, "I shall occupy the spare room."

Courtney gave a strange laugh.  He turned away, went into her bedroom.
Presently he reappeared exclaiming: "Why, where are my pajamas?  I told
Lizzie to put them in there."

Courtney’s smile was of the same quality of strangeness as her laugh of
the moment before.  "They are in the spare room," said she.  "I put them
there before I came in here."

He looked puzzled, vaguely discomfited.  "Oh—very well."  He glanced
inquiringly at her, decided against the trivial question he had been
about to ask.  "Good night."  He was again puzzled when what he heard
about the location of the pajamas was recalled and made vivid by the
sight of them on the turned-down bed in the spare room. But for an
instant only.  He dismissed the trifle and went to bed and to sleep.
Husbands do not bother their heads about the petty feminine
eccentricities of wives.  The mystery of these transposed pajamas was
too petty to detain a masculine mind.




                                  *VI*


She did not go down to breakfast next morning until Richard and his
guest would surely be gone.  Her anger against the guest had evaporated
because it was clearly unjust.  Her anger against Richard was subsiding
because it was clearly futile—and also because she hadn’t it in her to
foster harsh feeling.  But there remained a dislike and dread of
Gallatin because he had her secret.  She could not think with composure
of facing him, intolerably her partner in a secret she was ashamed of,
was hiding from her husband, was trying to hide from herself.  She would
be unable to look at him, to remember his existence even, without at the
same time having it thrust at her that her married life was a sham, a
hypocrisy.

Half an hour before dinner Richard came to her in the big greenhouse she
had built back of the library.  As the day was warm, all its doors and
sashes were open.  Richard sent Jimmie’s son Bill away and said with
agitated abruptness: "Courtney, Gallatin seems determined to take rooms
over at the hotel."

"I’m glad of that," replied she.  "It’s much better."  She had not
paused in her delicate task of extricating plants from their winter bed
and arranging them in a basket for taking into the garden.

"But it’s the first step toward going away.  He’ll never put up with the
hotel’s discomforts."  Her indifference, her inattention made him
impatient.  "My dear, you don’t understand.  I need him.  I’ve branched
out on the strength of the capital he’s supplying and has promised to
supply.  If he leaves, I’ll be in a hole.  We’ll have to cut down in
every direction, for I simply can’t abandon my new plans."

"I don’t like him," said Courtney.  She had abruptly stopped work, was
leaning against the frame facing him. "I want him out of the house."

Dick took the tone of gentle, forbearing remonstrance. "It’s too late to
change him to the Smoke House.  He feels your dislike—is eager to get
away.  If there were any ground for dislike, I’d say nothing.  As it is,
I—  I don’t like to assert authority, but your frivolous whimsicality
makes it necessary.  I want you at once to convince him that you wish
him to stay."

"But I don’t."  Her voice showed that those brief words were all she
could trust to it.

"You do, since I wish it."

"Why should I consider what you wish?  When have you considered what I
wish?"

"When have I been inconsiderate of what was for your good?"

She was silent—silenced, he thought.  His handsome face and his voice
were gentle; but underneath there was sternness in both as he said:
"You’ll not oppose me in this. It’d be a very severe strain upon my love
for you, if I found you so contemptuous of my interests.  I’m sure
you’ll not risk that strain."

She saw into what an impossible position her anger had hurried her.
Usually women, through playing upon the husband’s passions and
weaknesses generally, get enough control over him to be able to
maintain—with only an occasional slight lapse—the pleasant fiction that
they are of full human rank.  They take care to avoid such crises as was
this.  Courtney, by long keeping away from the bars of her cage, had
been lured into believing her pretense that they were not there.  She
now found herself bleeding and exhausted against them.  "Very well,"
said she, after a moment’s silence.  It had taken her quick mind only a
moment to see the alternatives—submission or a clash in which she could
not but be defeated.  "I’ll try to get him to stay."  Her voice was low
and broken, but not from anger.  Deeper than the sense of Richard’s
tyranny burned the humiliating sense of her servitude. In fact, her own
plight so mortified her that she had no emotional capacity for raging
against him as the author of it.  She felt, as always in these sex
conflicts, that the fault was not his, but fate’s; he was simply playing
his part as man, she her part as woman.

"That’s a good girl," cried her approving husband, kissing her brow.  It
did not occur to him, the deep-down reason of sordidness that enabled
him to compel; but she could think of nothing else.  "Be sweet to him,"
Dick went on, in an amiable, petting tone.  "And you may rest assured,
dear, I’ll get rid of him as soon as I can.  I don’t like intruders into
our happiness any more than you do."

Her cheeks flushed, and she turned again to the frame, to resume her
digging.  Her whole body to her finger tips was in a tremor.

Through dinner she was silent and cold; Gallatin hardly lifted his gaze
from his plate.  Whenever Richard could catch her eye, he frowned and
glanced significantly at Gallatin.  But her eyes met his hints with a
vacant look that made him twitch in his chair with nervousness and
exasperation.  As soon as Gallatin in politeness could, he excused
himself and left the family of three alone.

Richard, unmindful of Winchie, burst out, "What’s the meaning of this?

"You must let me humble myself in my own way," said Courtney coldly.
"Come, Winchie."  And the two went out on the lawn.

As Gallatin a few minutes later issued from the front door with Richard,
she called: "Oh, Mr. Gallatin, I want to speak to you a moment."

He halted.  The color flared into his face.  Richard said, "I’ll go on.
You needn’t hurry," and strode along the path into the eastern
shrubbery.  Gallatin hesitatingly crossed the grass.  Winchie, who had
on first sight taken an instinctive dislike to him, held a fold of
Courtney’s walking skirt and glowered like a small but very fierce
storm.

"Go to the veranda, Winchie," said his mother.

The boy released his hold and reluctantly obeyed. Gallatin stood before
her like a prisoner arraigned for sentence.  "Richard tells me you’re
talking of moving to the hotel over in town," said she.

"Yes, I’m going to-morrow."

"Because you feel I want you out of the house?"

"I think a man in my position couldn’t help being an intruder."

"I want you to stay."

His fair skin paled.  "I thank you," said he, "but I must go."

"I want you to stay.  I ask you to stay."

"That’s very kind.  I appreciate it.  But I really must go."

"I did wish you to go.  But now I sincerely wish you to stay."

Their eyes met.  She was as pale as her bronze complexion permitted.
She went on, her deep, clear voice steady, "If you go, you’ll put me in
a very painful position."

Gallatin looked at her, flushed, looked hastily away. In a voice of
intense embarrassment he said: "I’ve another reason for wishing to go.
It’s even stronger than the knowledge that you’re—very
naturally—displeased at my being forced upon you."

"Oh," said Courtney, baffled.  Then, "Please tell Richard what it is."

"I cannot."  His gaze was on the ground now.

Somehow Courtney was liking him better.  As he glanced up, her eyes met
his.  "Be frank with me," she urged winningly.  "Is it because you
dislike it here?"

"No."  His gaze was wandering again.  "No, indeed."

"I’m glad of that," said she.  "Do you believe me when I say I wish you
to stay?"

He lowered his eyes, remained silent.

"If I were free to choose, I would wish you to go," she went on,
speaking with the utmost deliberation.  "I am not free.  So, I wish you
to stay because it will be most unpleasant for me if you persist in
going.  I venture to ask you, if it is not too great a sacrifice, to
stay on—at least, for the present.  But if you still say you must go, I
shall not misjudge."

"I’ll stay," was his prompt response.  "Gladly."  And his tone and eyes
were sincere.

"Thank you," said she simply.

He looked at her with an appeal that was very engaging. "I know you’ll
hate me for having created this situation."

"I thought I did a few minutes ago," replied she. "Now, I feel I don’t.
I feel I’d like to be friends with you—"  Her small, sweet face lit up
with a faint smile—"since we can’t be enemies."

"You mean that?" he asked with an eagerness that sounded only the more
eager for his effort to restrain it.

"Indeed, I do," replied she.  "Will you help me with the gardening—when
you have time?"

"There’s nothing I’d like so well."

"Then—it’s all settled?"

"Quite."

They smiled gravely; they shook hands; they laughed. "And a little while
ago I was thinking I never could forgive you!" exclaimed she gayly.
"Now I’m wondering what on earth there was to forgive."  And she felt
and looked very well acquainted with him.  It was part of her
upright-downright nature either to like thoroughly or to be so
indifferent that she was little short of oblivious.

Before her generous friendliness the laughter died out of his face.
"I’ll try to be worthy of your friendship and your trust," said he
gravely.

"That sounds mysterious—somehow."

"Does it? ... When may I help you?"

"Whenever you can get off.  Soon?"

"To-morrow, I think."

"That’s good."

"I’ll join Vaughan."  He hesitated, blushed.  "He knows you were to ask
me to stay?"

"Yes.  But not how," was her calm answer.

"I understand."  Their eyes met.  He colored; but her expression, sweet
and grave, did not change.  As he went Winchie, seated morosely afar off
on the veranda steps, scowled at his back.

That evening Richard said: "Well, I think he’s going to stay.  How did
you manage it?"

"I’ve asked him to help me with the gardening.  He’s fond of it."

"A good idea," approved Richard.  "I’ll back you up."

She gazed silently out over the unruffled lake, so peaceful, so
suggestive of peace unchanging, endless—the lazy, graceful sails—beyond,
the town among its trees, lights coming out as the dusk gathered.


But their friendship, thus auspiciously begun, did not prosper.
Gallatin almost pointedly avoided her.  He helped her only when Richard,
disturbed from time to time by his unrelaxed reserve, urged him to take
a day or an afternoon off "and amuse yourself with the flowers, since
you like that sort of thing."  If it had not been that occasionally in
talking or working at the gardening he seemed to forget his solemn and
formal pose and showed unmistakable enthusiasm, she would have thought
his profession of interest a pretense.  She had a peculiar horror of
gloom—doubtless born of the austerity of her bringing up.  There was in
her circumstances only too much to discourage her natural brightness,
and she had within herself a struggle as incessant as that against weeds
and destructive insects in her gardens.  She had no desire to make this
struggle harder; so she saw as little of him as she in courtesy
could—the only course open to her, since she did not know him well
enough to try to help him.

"What’s the matter with Gallatin?" Richard asked her one day.  "He says
he likes it here and is going to stay, yet he acts as if he were
revolving something different. He used to be full of fun and life.  Now
he’s enough to give anyone the blues."

"He _is_ rather heavy," admitted Courtney.

"I wonder if it’s the booze," said Richard reflectively.

"The booze?"

"He always drank a lot more than was good for him. And there in
Pittsburg he got to lapping it up like the get-rich-quick crowd he
traveled in.  That was why he wanted to come here—to break off and take
a fresh start.  I suppose he’s gloomy because he’s fighting his taste
for rum."

"Probably," said Courtney.

Drink was a vice she could not comprehend—and we always are
unsympathetic toward the vices we do not comprehend.  She associated
drinking and stupidity; the Wenona men who drank to excess were the dull
ones, like Shirley Drummond.  When Richard thus disclosed to her what
Gallatin had meant by his mysterious hint as to his reason for coming to
Wenona, she lost the interest in him started by his fine frank way of
meeting her advances and his appreciation of her work.  She recalled his
other mysterious hint—about there being a hidden reason for his wishing
to go.  "No doubt," thought she, "he meant he’s finding it hard to keep
straight here, where it’s so quiet. I wish now that he’d gone—though,
when a man can give way to such a dull, dirty habit as drunkenness, he’d
find excuse anywhere."


As the mail came in the middle of the morning and the middle of the
afternoon, she saw it first.  Thus, she noted that about once a week
there was for him a foreign letter so heavy that it carried several
stamps.  These letters were from the same person, the same woman.  And
as the writing was large, rapid, and affectedly angular, she more than
suspected that the woman was young.  Somewhat tardily these facts,
obvious though their leading was, wove together in her mind, incurious
about other people’s affairs; she knew that there was traveling abroad a
young woman who taking the trouble to write their guest regularly and at
great length.  But when she happened to recall that he had a young
married sister, she assumed the letters were from her.

One day he casually said that his sister had taken a house at Bar Harbor
for the summer.  The moment he said this, she for some unknown reason,
or for no reason at all, jumped to the conclusion that his depressed
state was due to the lady of the letters—to her being so far
away—perhaps to some difficulty in their love—the objection of her
parents to his drinking habit.

All was now clear to her.  And thenceforth she looked at him with deep
sympathy.  He was not handsome; his mouth, for example, was so heavy
that it flatly gave the lie to his idealist, poetic eyes.  His nose was
not good, was too small for a man’s face.  Somewhere there lurked a
suggestion of weakness, and this was not lessened by his attention to
dress—though she liked his clothes and his way of wearing them.  He was
far from her ideal of a man.  But the longer one knew him, the better
one thought of him, chiefly because the more confidence one had in his
essential generosity and kindness.  And she felt that he had capacity
for tenderness of a very manly sort, and for appreciation of love and of
all the beautiful things; just the kind of nature fate seemed to delight
in making the sport of its maliciousness.

One night, in the pensive mood to which she sometimes yielded for an
hour, she was at the piano softly playing; and singing that saddest of
sad love’s songs:

    "Alas for lovers!  Pair by pair
      The wind has swept them all away—
    The young, the yare; the fresh, the fair—
      Where are the snows of yesterday?"


Through the window she saw him leaning against a pillar of the veranda.
His profile was outlined clear against the luminous dusk.  Its
expression made her voice die altogether in a sob.  She forgot her own
sense of fleeting wasting youth, of supreme joy forever denied, of love
never to be hers.  This sorrow before her in those profiled
features—they were strong features now—was no vague dream, but a living
reality.  She longed to go to him and try to console him; and at the
same time, no matter how well she had known him, she could not have
gone—for in that unsuspected strength of his there was the hopelessness
that is beyond consolation.  From that time he was the foremost figure
in her thoughts; and her fancy put its own color into everything he said
and did.  If he had begun to drink she would have been only the more
sympathetic; for, she could comprehend how unhappy love might drive its
victim to any excess—were not her own longings, for three years now
latent except for an occasional outburst, once more throbbing and aching
day and night?


It was part of her routine to make a careful tour every day to see that
everything was up to the mark.  One day, in their guest’s sitting room,
she happened to see half fallen from the stationery rack a letter from
his foreign correspondent.  It was apparently unopened.  The shock of
this made her take a second look before she realized how she was
intruding upon his sacred privacy.  But she had seen; the letter was
indeed unopened.  And she knew that the last come of these letters had
been at least three days in his possession.

Her heart ached for him; she felt she understood.  His love affair had
been going more and more badly—his increasing silence and sadness made
that certain.  And this letter must contain some news he dared not
read—some words that meant the burial of his dead hope.  She went
downstairs with a heavy heart, and out into the sunshine—out to the rose
garden in the western part of the grounds. She had been dreaming all
along that this romance of which she was unsuspected, deeply moved
spectator would surely "come out all right."  Life did not always mock
the story books.  Love was not always sad, not always mere deceptive
echo of one’s own heart call—echo that flitted mockingly on as one
pursued.  No; this love that meant so much to him would prove real.
Such had been her dream. Now—  The flowers, their perfume, the gay
birds, the sunbeams—all the sights and sounds she loved seemed tricks of
a black enchanter.  She remembered the day they buried her little
brother.  There had been just such radiant glory as this.  She
remembered the day she had seen that her own dream of love was dead.
There had been just such sunshine and music and perfume.  How could
anyone with a human heart even for a moment laugh, jest?  To be light
was to make oneself party to this cruel levity of bird and flower and
sunbeam.  Laugh, when loved ones were dying somewhere—and the living
were bending over dead faces with cracking hearts?  Jest, when the winds
of time and change were blowing love and lovers all away?


She caught her breath in a kind of terror when, on her return to the
house, Lizzie told her that Mr. Gallatin had dashed in, had packed a
bag, and had rushed off to Chicago.  "He has business there," Richard
explained at dinner.  "And I’ve asked him to buy some stuff for the
laboratory."  She was uneasy, at times unhappy, throughout the following
week, as she thought of him trying to rid himself of his too heavy
burden.  Probably he was dissipating—she hoped he was, if it would give
him relief. She began to debate whether she ought not to tell Richard
what she had accidentally discovered, and suggest that he go to Chicago
to help his friend, who might have fallen ill or worse.  At dinner and
at supper, even at breakfast, where she had seen him only occasionally,
she positively missed Gallatin.  Until he came, the time spent at table
had been the stupidest part of each day—Richard and she in silence or
abstraction, or exchanging disconnected commonplaces about the weather,
the food, their friends.  While Gallatin was far from lively, still he
and she had talked—usually about gardening and plants, the difficulties
and mysteries of inducing things to grow, the comparative merits of
various species for flowering and for hardiness—not exciting
conversation, but interesting, a relief to a monotony the dreariness of
which she did not appreciate until he came—and went.


On the eighth day, as they were at supper, he appeared unexpectedly on
the threshold.  There was no forcing in the cordiality of her smile.  At
first glance, she suspected that he was in much better spirits.  And
this impression was soon confirmed.  Certainly good news—the best—must
have reached him in Chicago.  Otherwise he could not sit there eating
heartily, laughing, making amusing remarks, telling funny incidents of
the trip.  Courtney tried to continue to feel delighted that he had
found surcease from sorrow.  But her spirits went steadily down.  She
felt horribly alone.  She had been company for him in his
unhappiness—though he did not know it.  Now, she quite unreasonably felt
as if he had deserted her.  She was ashamed of this, so ungenerous, so
selfish, but she could not help it.

After supper Richard left them alone; they went out on the veranda—out
where the full beauty of that place, now at summer’s climax, could be
seen in the soft sunset light.  She stood watching a belated bird, a
tall white sail—listening to the faint sounds of the town that came
tinkling across the water.  But she was thinking of the man beside her.
"You’ve been enjoying yourself in Chicago," said she.

"No," was his unexpected answer.  "I’ve been impatient to get back."  He
glanced round at trees and lawns, gardens and shrubbery, with delighted
eyes.  "I had to go away, to appreciate how well off I was."  He went to
the edge of the veranda to get a broader sweep.  He seemed to be noting,
reveling in, every detail.  He drew a deep breath, returned to the big
lounge chair, and lit a cigarette. "Yes," continued he.  "Yes—I didn’t
dream it, or imagine it.  It’s all true.  It’s all here."  Without
looking at her: "And you happen to be wearing the same dress you had on
the evening I came.  Now, don’t tell me you made it—as you’ve made those
gardens and these rooms."

"I superintend," said Courtney, thinking him a pleasant and agreeable,
if deplorably shallow person.  "I’m not one of those dreadful original
women who get up their own awful costumes, and think they’re individual
because they’re different."

"If you lived in Paris, you’d set the styles," declared he.  "And you’re
equally good at gardening and decorating houses."

"That’s laid on with the trowel," laughed she.  "But I like it."  She
returned to the subject that fitted her thoughts.  "You’re much livelier
than when you went away; I’m sure you’ve had good news."

"No—nothing.  I simply took myself in hand."  He reflected in silence,
then lifted his head and looked at her with a boyish simplicity and
candor.  "You see," he proceeded to explain, "I’ve had something on my
mind ever since I came—that is, almost ever since—something that was my
own affair entirely.  And I let it prey on me—made myself a nuisance and
a bore, I’ve no doubt."

There was a gleam of mischievous humor in her eyes as she nodded assent
and said: "You were solemner than I thought a human being could be."

"Precisely.  Well, that’s over.  As I said before, I didn’t realize how
well off I was, how much I had to be thankful for, as the pious people
say.  I do realize it. And I’m going to behave myself."

Courtney felt she ought to be scandalized by this vanishing of the last
solemn tatters of the tragic romance she had woven about him; for it was
clear as the lake that he had gotten over his bereavement in that one
brief week, had gotten over it entirely.  But somehow she was not
scandalized; was, on the contrary, taking quite cheerfully this
confirmation of his fickleness, of his incapacity for deep emotion.
After all, wasn’t that the best way to be? Wasn’t he perhaps philosopher
rather than shallow changeling? Wasn’t he simply exemplifying the truth
that fire burns out, that the dead are forgotten, that life leans always
at the bow of the ship, never at the stern?  She, eager to escape from
her own shadows and thorns, slipped easily into his mood.  "I should say
you did have a lot to be thankful for!" answered she.  "And you’ll soon
forget her."  She colored at her slip.  "I assume it was a love affair,"
she hastened to add.  "We women always do."

"Yes, it was."

"You’ll get over it."

"I do not wish to get over it."  He was not smiling back at her.  She
felt his thoughts traveling over land and sea, into Europe, whence came
those letters—there were two of them waiting on his desk upstairs.  "I
do not wish to get over it," he repeated.  "I’ve learned—"  His voice,
full of earnest young seriousness, sounded as if he were thinking aloud
rather than talking to her—"I’ve learned there’s a love deeper than the
love that demands—a love that appreciates where it dares not aspire—a
love that asks nothing but just silently to love."

There was a long silence, broken by the snapping of the match, as he lit
a cigarette.  She startled, rose, and leaned against a pillar.  With
eyes half veiled by her long lashes she watched the gardens wane
dreamily in the evening light.  She inhaled the odors of rose, of lilac,
of jasmine, of honeysuckle—perfumes so sweet that they were sad.  How
cruelly she had misjudged him!  She felt a kind of reverence for him
now, him with this nobility of soul so unconscious, so lofty.  Here was
a man worth a woman’s while.  "Why couldn’t I have had such a love as he
is giving?" she thought.  "Oh, if she had learned what I’ve learned!"

"Come into the sitting room, Gallatin," called Richard from that
direction.

Gallatin went, and for a few minutes Courtney heard, in intervals
between her thoughts, snatches of the talk between the two men about the
shopping Gallatin had done for the laboratory—talk about a new crusher,
about a promising bomb calorimeter.  After a while came in Vaughan’s
voice, "Courtney, what do you think of that?"

She stood in the window with an inquiring glance.

"I’ve been telling Gallatin you’re going to introduce him round among
the Wenona girls.  And he says he has no use for women."

"I!" exclaimed Basil.  "On the contrary, I think women—a woman—the most
important element in a man’s life."

Richard laughed.  "Why, the man’s in love!" cried he.

Courtney saw Gallatin wince as his wound was struck by this careless,
jovial hand.

"Only a lover," proceeded Dick, "would exaggerate woman in that frenzied
fashion.  To live isn’t to love.  It’s to do—to achieve."

"I don’t agree with you," said Gallatin.  "Love’s the center—the
mainspring—the purpose—the meaning."

"You ought to have been a woman."

"Why not?" retorted Gallatin.  Courtney saw that Dick had irritated him.
"In one respect I envy women. A woman _knows_ whether or not a man loves
her.  A man can only hope and believe."  And he glanced swiftly at her.

He looked confused, frightened, as her expression showed that she, the
married woman, the lovelessly married woman, understood.  She turned
away abruptly, two bright red spots burning in her cheeks.

"Well," said the unobserving Richard to Gallatin, "I confess I don’t
grasp your meaning.  But it doesn’t matter.  A good woman loves her
husband, and he knows it. The rest’s of no consequence.  We must get him
a wife, Courtney.  He’d make an ideal husband, don’t you think?"

"A good wife does not think," said Courtney.

Richard was amused.  "But if she did?" he persisted.

"Then she’d probably think it fortunate for husbands that wives aren’t
independent."

Vaughan again looked puzzled.  "That sounds as irrelevant as what
Gallatin said a minute ago.  Now will you tell us, what has it to do
with what we were talking about?"

"I don’t know," replied she.  And she did not.  She was astonished
before this apparition of a thought she had not been conscious of having
definitely in mind since that conversation with her mother long ago; and
here it was popping up as if it were her constant companion.  "It just
came into my head," she went smilingly on.  "You know we women are
irresponsible, irrational beings, and so we don’t think straight or talk
connectedly."

She said good night, went up to her apartment.  She was wishing now that
Gallatin had not told her about this love of his for the woman across
the seas.  It had made her discontented—unhappy.  It had compelled her
to think what a patchwork of makeshifts her own life was.  "Yet I ought
to be contented.  Haven’t I Winchie?  And I can’t even complain of poor
health or discomfort of any kind. I don’t deserve my good fortune.
Other women would envy me."  No, they would not.  She saw in remembered
faces of women friends the same discontent she was hiding in her heart.
A woman—a woman grown—craved more than material comfort could give, more
than work or play, however interesting, more than motherhood could
give—craved that grown-up, equal love without which life was like a
wonderful watch with a broken mainspring.  She thought of Basil Gallatin
again.  At least she was more fortunate than he.  Suppose she, like him,
loved and it were not returned.  Then indeed would her heart ache.

When she saw him alone next day, she said shyly and with color high: "It
seems to me you can’t have told her—told her as you told me.  Won’t you
go to her—not write, but go—and try again?  Believe me, Mr. Gallatin,
women appreciate love—at least, any woman who could inspire the love you
give her.  And if she knew, she’d love you—she couldn’t help it."

She feared she had intruded.  But when he at last spoke, his tone was
not the tone of one who is offended. "Thank you, thank you," he
stammered.  "But—  I assure you it’s hopeless.  She is not for me."

"Oh!"  Courtney shrank.  "She cares for some one else.  I—I’m so sorry I
spoke.  I——"

"No—no," he said; "it was friendly.  It was—like you."

This began their real friendship.  And she needed friendship just then.
What he had told her put her in a mood where all her occupations were in
vain, and all the wisdom she had gathered from books and from thinking
about things as they are, and all the patiently, slowly acquired
stoicism of the matrimonial routine.  Her heart was clamoring as it had
not since those first months of her discovery that love was delusion and
that she must learn to live without it.  She wished Gallatin had not
told her; she wished he had never come.  And at the same time she felt
that through the sadness he had brought there had come into her life a
pleasure she would not wish to give up—the sympathy between him and her,
based on their knowledge each of the other’s secret.  She felt very
proud of his confidence, of his friendship.  Also, there was the
fascination that always issues from a great emotion, even though it be
seen but in mimic on the stage.  This great emotion of his was a vivid
actuality.  It made a smile upon his features heroism; it made a look of
sadness tragedy.

He helped her in the gardens often now.  Richard, making some secret
experiments, did not want him at the laboratory.  Sometimes he and she
worked together at changing color schemes or improving mass effects or
vistas.  Again each worked alone, perhaps at some surprise for the
other.  It was after a morning of hard labor in opposite ends of the
grounds that she said when they met at the house: "Richard’s not coming
up, so Nanny has to take him his dinner.  And Lizzie’s away and Mazie
not well.  I’ll wait on you."

"Let’s have a picnic," suggested he, "out under that big elm."

And with Winchie helping they carried everything to the rustic table and
proceeded to have one of those happy-go-lucky meals that make the blue
devils put their tails between their legs and fly away on their forks.
Winchie, let eat what he pleased, forgot his dislike of Gallatin—at
least so far that he only frowned occasionally as Gallatin and Courtney
talked the most hopeless nonsense with the keenest pleasure.  When
Basil’s face was animated it was never homely; when he smiled it was
always handsome. For the first time since he came he lost all
constraint, and the sparkle of girlhood came back to her.  They stayed
out there nearly three hours, and it seemed no time at all. Nanny, sour
and scowling at the impropriety of such conduct in a married woman—one
married into the ancient and rigid house of Vaughan—took away the dishes
and linen. But the hint so plain in her dour looks went unnoted. It was
a shower that broke up the party, sent them scurrying to the house, he
carrying furious and protesting Winchie.  She punished Winchie for his
rudeness by sending him up to his bedroom to sit alone and think down
his temper.

"You oughtn’t to have done that," said Basil, when the boy, defiant even
in obedience, disappeared.

"It’s the only way to make him remember.  And I can’t whip him.  I’m too
selfish, even if I didn’t know it was equally degrading to him."

"He can’t help not liking me," persisted Basil. "We’re not to blame for
our likes and dislikes."

"No.  But we are to blame for giving way to them."  She was arranging
freshly cut flowers in vases and jars in the sitting room.

"Yes, for giving way to them," said Basil thoughtfully, after a long
time.

"To what?" asked Courtney, who had forgotten.

"Our feelings."

"Oh, I remember."

"You’re right about that."  Basil was speaking with an effort.  "For
example, if a man were to—to fall in love with a married woman, he’d be
a—miserable cur if he told her.  Those last few words came explosively.

"Gracious!"  Courtney beamed mischievously at him from behind a gorgeous
spread of half blown roses.  "You are fierce!  Well, that’s settled.  If
he heard you, he’d never dare tell her."

She saw his face, and it flashed over her that it was a married woman he
loved.  Yes, of course!  Why had she not guessed it at once!  And he was
saying these harsh things to make it impossible for himself to yield to
the impulse.  The smile left her eyes.  He was at the window with his
back to her.  She looked tender sympathy.  "Poor boy!" she thought.
"And I saw to-day how happy he could be, and how happy he could make a
woman.... Perhaps she does love him.  What a sorrow that would be! And
utterly hopeless!"

He turned abruptly.  "Will you be my friend?"

She came straight up to him, put out her hand.  "Indeed I will," she
said.

He took her hand, pressed it.  Then he drew back with his hands behind
him.  "You are a good woman," he said. "Good through and through.  I
want you to help me fight a battle I’m having just now.  I thought I’d
won it.  I haven’t.  But I will!"

"I understand, I think.  It is hard.  But you are strong and honorable.
You—  The woman—  She is already—" She paused, looked at him
inquiringly.

"Yes—God help me!" he cried, turning away.

His cry could not have reached a more responsive heart. After a pause
she said: "If she doesn’t love you, it’d be useless to tell her."

"Worse!  It would mean I was a cur."

"And if she does love you, it’d be wicked to tell her—to add to her
unhappiness."

"If you were in my place—  Suppose I could be with her—could go and live
near her——"

"Oh, no; you oughtn’t to do that!  You ought to spare yourself and her
that."

"But suppose," he urged eagerly, "suppose she didn’t care for me—never
would—and I could keep my secret——"

"But you couldn’t!  And she might grow to care."

He sat in a big chair by the window, stared moodily at the floor.  "It
seems to me I _can’t_ do that!" he said at last.  "I don’t love her as
men usually love.  She means infinitely more to me than that.  And,
loving her as I do, I’m in no danger of telling her.  And it would make
me almost happy so much of the time, and a better man—yes, a better
man—to be near her.  What you say I ought to do—it’s like turning a man
out into the desert without food or drink—to wander—on and on——"

"I know, I know," she interrupted, her small, sweet face all tenderness
and distress.  "Oh, I’m not competent to advise.  You mustn’t ask
anyone.  You must do what you think is right."

"Right!" he echoed forlornly.

She who had eaten of the husks that went by the name of right hadn’t the
heart to urge them on him.  She returned to the table, to the arranging
of the flowers.  Without looking up he went on: "I haven’t told you
quite all. There’s another thing.  I—I’m engaged."

"Engaged!"

"Don’t look at me that way.  I can feel it, though I’m not seeing.  You
can’t think less of me than I think of myself.  But let me tell you.
The girl’s a distant cousin of mine.  And her grandfather, who was crazy
about families, left her a fortune on condition that she married me. He
left an equal sum to me on condition that I marry her. But there’s this
difference: What he left her is all she’d have—every cent.  I’ve got
enough without his legacy to me."

"And you—  Oh, it’s dreadful, isn’t it?"

"We’re not in love—not in the least.  But I’ve given her my promise, and
she’d be penniless if I broke it.  She’s nineteen.  We’ve got till she’s
twenty-one.  She’s abroad now."

"The letters I’ve seen in the mail—they’re from her?"

"From her," replied he.  "How can I marry when I love another woman?"

"I see," said Courtney.  She was sitting now, her hands full of roses
and listless in her lap.  "Then you’ve no more right to love this woman
than she has to love you....  Oh, I don’t know what to say!"

"Don’t think I’m trying to shift part of my burden to you.  I’m not.
But I felt if I could talk it out loud with some one who was sympathetic
I’d see the way better. And I do."  The expression of his eyes thrilled
her; it was so manly, so honest, so resolved.

"What have you decided—if you don’t mind telling me?"

"To go to Starky—-that’s my cousin—her real name’s Estelle, but she
detests it—I’ll go to her and we’ll marry."

"No—no!" cried Courtney.  "Whatever’s right, that isn’t.  Oh, you don’t
know.  She has a right to love. You’re cheating her—cheating her!"

"But I can never give her that."

"You may——"

"Never!"

Courtney shook her head slowly, lifted the roses, buried her face in
them, inhaled their perfume deeply.  "Then—you mustn’t marry her," she
said.

"You don’t know her.  She cares for money—the things money buys—more
than for anything else in the world. It’s the way we bring ’em up in the
East.

"Believe me," cried Courtney, solemn in her earnestness, "that’s not
true.  There isn’t any woman anywhere who doesn’t put love first.  Go to
your cousin—yes.  But go and try to love her."

His eyes suddenly blazed upon her.  "Love her after—" he began
impetuously.  He reddened, his head sank.  "After the woman I—"  He
muttered confusedly, "I can’t talk about it," and hastily left the room
by the door-window nearest him.

She sighed sympathetically, rose, moved slowly toward the vase she had
only half finished.  Midway she halted. That look of his had just
penetrated to her.  "Oh!" she gasped.  And she wheeled round and stared
with blanching cheeks, as if he were still standing there before her
with his secret betrayed in his eyes.  "Oh!" she repeated under her
breath.  How her mistaken romancings about his sadness had misled her
woman’s instinct!  For now, like steel filings round a magnet, a swarm
of happenings since he came ranged round that telltale look of his—where
they belonged.




                                 *VII*


Basil was last in to supper, came with his nervousness plain in his
features.  His uneasy glance at her met a smile of ingenuous
friendliness that could not but reassure. Richard was there,
absent-minded as usual, and unconscious of them both.  They were
unconscious of him also, Basil no less so than she, for he had long
since acquired the habit of the household.  No one spoke until Richard,
having finished, lighted a cigarette and fell to explaining to Basil an
experiment he had made that day.  He was full of it, illustrated his
points with diagrams drawn on the yellow pad which was never far from
his hand.  Courtney, relieved of the necessity of trying to look natural
before Basil, was able to turn her thoughts again to the subject that
had been occupying her steadily from the moment she discovered his
secret.

If Gallatin could have seen into her mind, he would have been as nearly
scandalized as it is possible for an infatuated, unsatisfied lover to
be.  For even where a man feels he himself has the right to revolt
against exasperating musts and must nots of conventional morality, he is
unusual indeed if he honestly approves any such revolt, however timid,
in a woman.  Man is the author and guardian of that morality; in the
division of labor he has imposed upon woman the duty of being its
exemplar.  Thus, though human, she must pretend not to be; she must
stifle if possible, conceal at any cost, her human fondness for the free
and the frank.  For Courtney there was double attraction in this love of
Basil’s—because it was love for her and because she was lonely—how
lonely she had never realised until now.  There is the loneliness of
physical solitude, the loneliness for company—and a great unhappiness it
is, especially to those who approach the lower animals in lack of
resources within themselves.  Courtney had never suffered from this; she
had never cared for "just people."  Then there is the loneliness of soul
solitude, the loneliness for comradeship—and who suffers from this
suffers torment. It may lull, but it will surely rage again, and it will
never cease until it is satisfied or the heart itself ceases to beat.
This was the loneliness of Courtney Vaughan.  "If he," thought she,
"were bad, and I, too—no, perhaps not exactly bad, but—well,
different—less—less conscientious—how happy we might be!  That is, of
course, if I cared for him—or could make myself believe I did—which is
impossible."  She lingered over this impossible supposition as over a
sweet, fantastic dream.  She dropped it and turned away, only to return
to it.  And thinking of it filled her with the same tender sadness she
got from love stories and love songs.  "I would not if I could, I could
not if I would, but—"  Love!  Into the silence of that void in her life
had come a sound.  It was the right word, but not the right voice.
Still, there was joy in the right word. And she would not have been
human had she bent other than kindly eyes and kindly thoughts upon the
man who pronounced that word of words.  Long since—from her first notion
that he was hiding a romantic secret—his real self had begun to receive
from her imagination the transfiguring veil of illusion.  The discovery
that she herself was the secret certainly did not make the veil thinner.
A strong imagination flings out this beautiful, trouble-making drapery
always; not quite so eagerly if there has been sad warning experience,
but none the less inevitably.  It would be many a day, if ever, before
Courtney could again see Basil Gallatin as he was in reality.

As she sat there, silent, all but oblivious of her immediate
surroundings, she was awakened by hearing him say, in reply to something
from Richard: "But I’m afraid I’ll have to—to change my plans—and—go
away."  It was said hesitatingly, with much effort.

"Go away!" cried Richard.  Courtney could not have spoken.

"I’m afraid so."

"Not for good?"

"Probably—in fact, almost certainly."

"Why, man, you can’t do that!" protested Dick.  "You can’t leave me in
the lurch."

"Oh, I want to keep my interest.  It’s simply that I can’t stay on,
myself."

"But I need you now as much as I need the capital. Why, it’d upset
everything for a year—perhaps longer. I couldn’t easily find a competent
man I could trust."

Basil repeated in a final, dogged way, "It’s impossible for me to stay."

"Is there anything unsatisfactory in——"

"No—no indeed.  My own affairs entirely, I assure you."

As he had finished supper, Vaughan took him out on the veranda, where
Courtney heard them—or, rather, heard Dick—arguing and protesting.
Presently she drifted into the sitting room, sat at the piano, let her
fingers wander soundlessly over the keys.  What should she do?  What was
best for him—for her—"and there’s Richard, too, who needs him."  Why
should he go?  How would it help matters?  True, she had declared that
to be the right course; but then she was merely theorizing, merely
talking the conventional thing.  This was no theory, but actuality,
calling for good common sense.  It was not the first time she had found
the facts of life making mockery of the most convincing theories about
it.  Presently she felt that Basil was in the window farthest from her,
was watching her—probably with the same loving, despairing expression
she had often seen without a suspicion that it was for her.

"Where’s Richard?" inquired she, not looking in his direction.

"In the library."

"You’ve upset him dreadfully."

"I’m sorry.  But things will soon adjust themselves."  He advanced a
step, was visible now in the half darkness, looked pallidly handsome in
his becoming dinner suit.  "A few weeks at most," he went on, somewhat
huskily, "and I’ll be the vaguest sort of a memory here."

She was glad her back was toward him and that the twilight had darkened
into dusk.  Of course, he did not really love her.  It was simply
another case of a man’s being isolated with a woman and his head getting
full of sentimental fancies.  Still—  While his love was not real, and
therefore its pain largely imaginary, the pain no doubt seemed real, and
the love, too.  So she was sad for him—very sad.  As soon as she felt
sure of her voice, she said: "Won’t you please light the big lamp for
me?  I wore a négligée this evening because I wanted to sew. I’m making
a suit for Winchie—like one I saw in a French magazine."

He lit the lamp beside the table where she worked in the evenings when
she did not go to her own room.  "Anything else?" he asked.

"Only sit and talk to me."

"I couldn’t talk this evening."

"Then sit and smoke."

She began her work, he smoking in the deep shadow near the window.  She
could hardly see him; he could see every wave and ripple in her lovely
hair, every shift of the sweeping dark lashes, every change in that
sweet, small face, in the wide wistful mouth.  Even better than playing
on the piano, sewing brings out the charm of delicate, skillful fingers.
She did not need to look at him to feel his gaze, its longing, its
hopelessness.  And never before had she thought of him in such a
partial, personal way—the way a woman must feel toward the man she knows
loves her, even though she only likes him.

She had made up her mind what to do, how to deal practically with this
situation.  But she had to struggle with her timidity before she could
set about the audacious experiment she had planned and resolved.  She
had long had the frankness of thought that is inseparable from
intelligence.  The courage to speak her thoughts was as yet in the bud.
"Do you mind my speaking again of what you were saying this afternoon?"
said she as she sewed industriously.

"No," said he.

"I’ve been thinking about it.  At first I was startled—very much
startled.  But I soon began to look at it sensibly. I want you to stay.
Richard wants you to stay.  There’s no reason why you shouldn’t stay and
conquer your delusion."

"It’s no delusion."

"Real love is always mutual.  So yours must be delusion."  She was
pointing a thread for the eye of the needle.  "You’ve led a very—very
man sort of life, haven’t you?"

He shifted uncomfortably, then confessed: "You know the standards for
men are different from those for women."

She smiled, threaded the needle.  "Yes, I know.  I don’t understand, but
I know.  You needn’t explain. I don’t want to understand.  It doesn’t
interest me. As I was about to say—"  Her courage failed her, and she
sewed a while in silence.  At last she dared.  It was with no sign of
inward disturbance, but the contrary, that she went on: "You’ve been
shut in here too long.  Go to your old haunts for a few days.  You’ll
come back cured."

She had practiced saying it, this advice which she believed wise and
necessary in the circumstances.  She said it in calm, matter-of-fact
fashion; and it was the less difficult for her to do so because, in
thought at least, she had long since emancipated herself from what she
regarded as the hypocrisies of modesty, and had taught herself to look
at all things rationally and humanly.  She knew her frankness would not
please him; so she was not surprised when after a pause he said roughly,
"I don’t like to hear you say that sort of thing."

She laughed pleasantly, put quite at ease by his impertinence.  "And I
don’t in the least care whether you approve of me or not.  You men seem
to think you’ve got a sort of general roving commission to superintend
the propriety of women."

"I beg your pardon."

"Certainly.  Give me that pair of scissors—on the stand in the corner."

He rose, issued from the deep shadow.  She could now see into what
confusion her words had thrown him.  The hand that held out the scissors
was trembling.  He moved to go upon the veranda.  "Please," said she.
"I’m not nearly done.  Won’t you sit down?"

He seated himself.

"You see," she went on lightly, busy with her hem again, "I know your
awful secret."

"You’ve no right to laugh at me," muttered he.

"I’m not laughing at you....  I’m only looking at it in a friendly,
practical way....  I want to help you.... Why are you going away?"

She sewed on, feeling his emotion gather behind his self-control.  The
stillness was unbroken.  A light breeze, cool and scented, came
fluttering in at the open windows to play with the soft brilliant hair
that grew so beautifully round her temples.  In a low voice, so low that
she scarcely heard, his answer at last came: "Because I love you.  I
love you and I am not a cur."

Her needle missed its way into the cloth, pierced her finger.  She put
the wounded finger in her mouth.  When she looked toward him she was
smiling.  "Still you’ve not answered my question.  Because you think you
care for me—that’s no reason why you should go.’

"I can’t control myself.  I—"  He made a gesture of helplessness.  "I
can’t think of you as—as married.  You seem like a girl to me—free.  I
keep forgetting."

"It doesn’t seem to occur to you that I might be trusted to remember."

"I know," said he humbly.

She held the garment at arms’ length, eyeing the hem critically.  "No,
you don’t.  You’re like all the men.  You fancy weak woman can always be
overborne by man, big and strong and superior."

"You wrong me."

"Why else should you talk of going away?"

"Because it’s torment to me to be near you—to——"

She stopped sewing, looked at him with anger in her deep green eyes.
"Then your feeling is just what I thought."

"It is not!  It is love!"

Again she sewed a long time in silence.  It was very calm there, in that
quiet room with its flowers and tasteful, gracefully arranged furniture,
and the single lamp like a jewel shedding all its radiances upon her
small industrious figure.  "Then tell me," she said in her sweet, gentle
way, without looking up or pausing, "what do you want that you cannot
have?  You can see me as much as you like.  You can talk as freely as
you like.  You can count on sympathy, on friendship.  And, if you want
to, you can keep right on loving me in that exalted way you profess.
Nobody’s going to hinder you."

She sewed on in silence, he motionless watching her, perplexity in his
honest, rather boyish face.  After a while her voice broke the silence.
"Love!"  She laughed with raillery that did not sting.  "My dear friend,
don’t you see I was right?  Go away for a few days and——"

"For God’s sake, don’t suggest that again."

"Then don’t say it’s love that makes you want to leave and upset
everything."  She put the needles, thread, and thimble into her workbox,
rolled up the little suit, rose. "It’s always the same story," she said,
sad rather than bitter.  "A woman means only one thing to a man.  Yes, I
think you had best go."

"You’re too severe," he cried.  "It’s true there’s such a thing as
passion without love.  And I’ll admit that I, like all men have felt it
often—have lied to myself as well as to the woman—and have called it
love.  But it’s also true there’s no love without some passion—at least,
_you_ couldn’t hope to inspire it.  And though in your innocence you may
think so, you’d not want to have less than all love has to give—if you
loved."

Her eyes, large and softly brilliant, were burning into the darkness
beyond the open window.  "I’m not innocent," she said.  "And I try not
to be a hypocrite.  If I loved, I’d want all."

There was a long silence, she at the window gazing out into the
gathering night.  Then he said: "You were right. It was not love that
made me feel like flight.  I can conquer that feeling.  Will you let me
stay?"

She turned slowly.  In the look she fixed on him there was doubt,
hesitation.  "You’ve made me a little uneasy—a little afraid."

In his eagerness he sprang up.  "Don’t!" he cried. "Don’t send me away.
I’ll never speak of love again. You’ve taught me my lesson."

"I do want you to stay," said she.  "It’d seem very lonely here with you
gone.  For I’ve come to depend on you as a friend.  It hurts to find you
seeking your own selfish pleasure under the pretense of a feeling for
me."

He winced—not because he felt scandalized by her candor, but because he
felt convicted by it.  "How well you understand men!" he exclaimed.
"Better than they understand themselves."

"In that one way I do," was her reply, an arresting hardness in the deep
voice that was usually altogether sweet.  These last few days she was
understanding a great many things about the relations of men and
women—or, perhaps, was letting herself realize that she understood them.

He lowered his eyes, that he might not read her thoughts, that she might
not read the same thoughts in his own mind.  "You often make me think of
the lake out there," said he.  "There’s the surface one sees at a
glance.  Then there’s a little distance below the surface, that one sees
when he looks intently straight down.  And then there’s fathoms on
fathoms where all sorts of strange things—strange thoughts and
feelings—lie hid. Sometimes—for an instant—one of them shows or almost
shows at the surface."

"When one lives alone a great deal, one gets the habit of living within
oneself—don’t you think?"

"I suppose that’s it—partly.  A brook couldn’t hide very much—and most
people are like brooks or ponds. The ones that seem to have depth seem
so simply because the water’s muddy."

She looked admiringly at him; and her admiration of his originality and
insight did not lessen when he added, "At least, so a friend of mine
used to say."  He returned to _the_ subject.  "Then—I may stay?"

Her face brightened.  In her eyes as they looked at a smile slowly
dawned.  Quickly all her features were responding, especially that wide,
expressive fascinating mouth.  "I hope you will.  But—no more
dreariness!"

"I hate gloom as much as you do."  He glanced round the room—at the
harmonies of woodwork and walls and furnishing, with here and there
bright flowers always in the restraint of those of gentle hue.  "As much
as you do," repeated he.  "And that’s saying a great deal.  How _do_ you
manage it!—house and garden, always gay yet never gaudy—and such
variety!  Is there no end to your variety?"

"Oh, one’s a new person every day, isn’t one?—and different."

"_You_ certainly are.  But no one else I ever saw."  He colored
furiously at his finding himself, without intending it, upon the
forbidden ground.  She had turned away, and was leaving the room—the
safest course, since it enabled her to hide her pleasure in the
compliment that peculiarly appealed to her, and also seemed to give him
a sufficient yet not harsh rebuke.

Her aversion to restraint was perhaps stronger than is the average
woman’s—certainly had more courage.  She had been too thoroughly trained
in the conventionalities not to have the familiar timidity as to action,
so strong in all conventionally bred people, so dominant over women. But
the "unhand-me" spirit of her time was finding outlet in thought and
feeling.  Reflecting much in her aloneness, she had reached many
audacious conclusions about life and the true meaning of its comedy
drama—that meaning so different from what we pretend, from what usually
passes as truth in history, philosophy, and literature, based as they
are upon man’s cheap hankering for idealistic strut. The audacities of
thought that occasionally showed at her surface in speech or commentary
of smiling eyes and lips were conventional in comparison with whole
schools of deep-swimming ideas and fancies that kept hours of aloneness
from being hours of loneliness.  Physically, her passion for freedom
showed itself in her dislike of tight or stuffy garments.  She could
pass her hand round her waist inside her closest-fitting corset.  Her
liking for few clothes and for as little yoke and sleeves as custom
allowed came not from the thought for the other sex that often explains
this taste, but from aversion to restraint.

As usual, the first thing she did that night, when she was alone in her
rooms, was to rid herself of all her clothing and put on the thinnest of
thin white nightgowns, almost sleeveless, and cut out at the neck.  She
thrust her feet into bedroom slippers, braided her long hair with its
strands of red almost brown, with its strands of brown almost gold.  She
turned out the light, threw open all the long shutters screening her
windows, to let her bedroom fill with warm, perfumed freshness from lake
and gardens. She stepped out on the balcony to take the breathing
exercises that kept her body straight, her chest high, her bosom firm as
a girl’s, and her form slim and supple. The fireflies were floating and
darting in the creepers and the near-hanging boughs.  The slight
agitations of the air stole among the folds of her gown and over her
neck and arms like charmed fingers.  There was no moon; but she did not
miss it in the dim splendor of the thronging stars.

"Aren’t you about ready to come in?"

She startled, suppressed a scream.  She turned. Richard was standing in
the window.  Her blood which had rushed to her heart surged out again
and into her brain in an angry wave.  She hated to be taken by surprise.
It was on the tip of her tongue to cry furiously, "I detest being spied
upon."  But she had resolved soon after Winchie was born never to speak
angrily to him, never to let him hear her speak angrily.  The habit
restrained her now, as it had scores of times.  Instead, she said: "Why,
how did you get in?  I’m sure I locked my door."

"So you did," replied Dick in the cheerful unconscious way that so
irritated her in certain moods.  Not always could she bear with
composure his masculine assumption that whatever pleased him must
delight his wife.  "So you did," said he.  "And it’s still locked.  But
there was the window from the front balcony into your sitting room—and
the door from your sitting room to this room.  You see, I was determined
to find you."

His tone of laughing tenderness helped her half to guess, half to make
out his expression.  Usually she accepted without a protesting thought
the whole of the routine of married life.  But to-night she grew hot
with a burning blush of imperiled modesty as he advanced toward her.
"Don’t," she said; "I’m doing my exercises."

"No—you were dreaming.  Of what?"  Then, without waiting for an answer
about a matter of so little importance, "Gallatin tells me he has
decided to stay on—if he can arrange it—and he seems to think he can.
So I’m feeling fine.  You don’t know what a jolt he gave me at supper.
Did you talk with him about it?"

"Yes."

"Urged him to stay?"

"I tried to show him he ought to stay."

"Ever so much obliged."

She stopped in her exercises to say quickly: "Oh, I didn’t do it for
you.  I did it for myself."

"Why, you dislike him."

"He’s some one to talk with—some one that listens and answers.  And—I
don’t dislike him."

Richard laughed.  "That’s right.  Try to make the best of it.  Well, if
you’re not coming in——"

"Not for an hour or longer."

"Then—good night.  I must be up early.  I think I’ll sleep down at the
Smoke House.  I’m so glad about Gallatin—just as much obliged as if
you’d done it for me. And I believe you did."  He put his arms round her
to kiss her good night.  As soon as his lips touched her cheek she drew
away, disengaged herself.  "What’s the matter, Courtney?"  She had long
since learned that for all his absent-mindedness and ignoring of things
that didn’t directly interest him, he became as sensitive—and as
accurate—as photographic plate to light, the instant his attention
happened to be caught.  "What’s the matter?  Why do you draw away?"

"I don’t know," replied she—truthfully, yet with a sense of being
untruthful.  "I seem not to like to be touched to-night."

"I don’t remember you being that way before."

She went on with her exercises; he yawned and departed.




                                 *VIII*


The morning after Courtney and Basil came to this clear and promising
understanding, she got down to the seven-o’clock breakfast perhaps ten
minutes late.  She expected to find the two men and Winchie there, and
was thinking of asking Gallatin to go to town with her and Winchie.
When she entered the dining room, there was the table in its usual
morning place, in the wide-flung door windows to the cast, and at it sat
Winchie only, sunbeams sifting through the trellised morning glories to
dance upon his shock of tawny hair.

"Where are the others?" she asked.

Winchie, forgetful of his teaching, had his mouth full, far too full for
immediate speech—unless he gulped it empty, and that would have been
breaking another rule. So Lizzie, who was just entering from the kitchen
hall, answered: "Mr. Richard telephoned up at half past six, and made me
wake Mr. Gallatin.  They had breakfast down at the Smoke House long
ago."

Winchie had climbed from his high chair and had come round to kiss his
mother good morning.  He was dressed for the trip to town—all white
except dark blue edging round his wide collar, and a dark blue belt.
His features suggested his father’s and his mother’s, yet were those of
neither.  That morning their usual suggestions of will and character
were lost in a general expression of sweet good humor.  He looked a
sturdy bronzed cherub.  After searching his mother’s face with those
inquiring, seeing eyes of his, he said: "Mamma’s happy this morning,"
and resumed breakfast.

"Indeed she is!" exclaimed Courtney.

She drew the bowl of yellow daisies and pink-white mountain holly from
the center of the table, and fell to rearranging them.  Each blossom
seemed to glide into just its right position, as if there were magic in
her fingers. She could not remember when she had felt quite so content
and hopeful.  And her spirits rose as the day advanced.  On the way to
town she stopped at the Vaughan farm across the highroad to inquire into
a slight falling off in quality of butter and milk.  She had never seen
the farm so fascinating.  The very dock weed and dog fennel carpeting
the barnyard had an air and a charm.  And the road to town, as she and
Winchie sped along in the runabout—what a shady lane through Paradise it
was!  In town everyone seemed so agreeable, so glad to see her.  After
lunch with Sarah Carpenter, she shopped, made several calls.  They did
not start home until late, and supper was on the table when they
arrived.  At the table—always in the middle of the room for the evening
meal, and formally set—at the table was Richard, alone, eating and
figuring on his everlasting yellow pad.

"Hello!" said he, with barely a glance away from his pencil point.
"Glad to have company."

"Where’s Mr. Gallatin?" asked Winchie.

"Gone," was Dick’s curt answer in the tone of an interrupted man.  "I
sent him away."

Courtney, crossing the room, halted.  A moment of horrible silence.
"Gone!" she echoed hoarsely, her eyes wide, as if a monster had suddenly
appeared open-jawed in her very face.  "You—sent—him away!"

Vaughan, without looking up, said: "What did you say?"

With her hand on her heart, "I thought I understood you to say Mr.
Gallatin had gone."

"So he has.  For a few days."

"Oh!"  Courtney drew a vast breath of relief.  She felt a tugging at her
skirt, glanced down.  It was Winchie, looking up at her with an
expression of terror; and she knew she must have revealed herself in her
face.  Her pale cheeks flooded with color.  She sank into her chair
opposite her husband.  She could lie to herself, cheat herself, no
longer.  "How much Basil means to me!" she muttered.  Then, in terror,
she glanced round, for she felt as if she had shouted it.  But Vaughan
was at his unending calculations.  Only Winchie saw.  _Only_ Winchie!
There was a look in his great gray-green eyes, a look of the accusing
angel, that made her hang her head while the dark red burned upon her
whole body.

"He’ll be back Thursday or Friday," continued Vaughan, tossing the pad
into the window seat, a dozen feet away.

"You sent him on business?" inquired she, to make conversation.

"He wanted to go to Pittsburg, so he told me.  I guess it’s some girl.
I suspect our ’dressy’ friend of being a ladies’ man.  He takes too much
trouble about his clothes—and silk underclothes!  Anyhow, I let him go."

She sat there, the food untouched, her blood pounding at her temples, at
her finger ends.  For she was remembering her advice to Basil when she
was trying both to persuade him to stay and to deceive herself as to why
she intensely wished him to stay.  And now, on her advice—on the advice
of the woman who loved him—he was journeying—even as she sat quietly
there at supper in respectable calm—he was journeying to his "old
haunts"—to some woman—he who belonged to her!  Such a wild tempest raged
in her that she wondered how she could sit motionless, why she was not
walking the floor and crying out.  With another woman!  Oh, the vileness
of men!  "And I was beginning to care for him!" she said to herself.
"He’s like the rest—worse than most. How many men are there who’d dare
talk of love to a woman like me, and then go jauntily away to a low
woman?"

She went upstairs immediately after supper, shut herself in.  She moved
calmly about; she took her exercises; she read for several hours before
turning out her light. But beneath a surface that could have been no
more tranquil had she been observed and on guard, chaos reigned. One
tempest succeeded another—anger against Basil, against herself—disgust,
scorn, jealousy—and, before she slept, she had seen that in reality all
these moods were jealousy under different forms.  The following morning,
when the coast was clear, she slipped into his room, knelt by his
untouched bed, cried upon its pillow.  This humility soon wept itself
out, however; she flung herself into her work.  "Nonsense!  I don’t care
for him.  It’s simply pique and outraged friendship.  How coarse men
are!"

"What’s the matter, mamma?" said Winchie, who was following her about
the garden, looking after insects and dead leaves.  Than his there never
was a keener eye for signs of the red spider.

"Why, dear?"

"You treat the flowers as if you wanted to hurt them."

"Your mamma is in a very naughty humor this morning."

"And you were so happy yesterday.  Is it because Mr. Gallatin’s gone
away?"

Courtney, flushing deeply, looked hastily round.  "Sh! You mustn’t say
those things!"

"Why not?"

Already she was teaching the boy to conceal!  "I didn’t mean that,
Winchie," said she.  "You are to say whatever you please—as always."

"I don’t want you to like Mr. Gallatin.  _I_ don’t like him."

"Why not?"

"Because he likes you."

"You wouldn’t want anybody not to like your mamma, would you?"

"No."  A long silence.  Then: "But he looks at you exactly like papa
does when he’s really seeing you."

Courtney’s skin burned.  The same story—always the same!
"Well—dear—I’ll not like him."

"I hope he won’t come back."

The suggestion set her heart to aching with loneliness. "I have no shame
and no pride," she said to herself. "What a contemptible creature a
woman is!"  But these sneers availed her nothing.  As she sat at
table—dinner and supper—his vacant place gave her a sense of bereavement
not unlike death itself.

Another night of wakefulness and of the subtle and varied torments known
only to those blessed and cursed with vivid imagination.  What if he
should not come back!  That was the final and crudest twist of the rack.
Next day, it was all day long as if the silence and darkness of the
night were still suffocating her.  The house, the grounds seemed a
desolation of despair.  What if he should not come back!  A drizzling
rain fell, and she sat miserably by the window, unable to sew, unable to
read. And at the first sound from the piano—the melancholy notes her
fingers instinctively struck—she sprang away as if a hateful ghost had
breathed on her.  It was only Wednesday; he would not be home until the
next day—probably not until Friday—perhaps not then.

She put fresh flowers in vases in all the rooms every day.  That day she
filled the vases in his sitting room with the best.  And she lingered
among his belongings, that promised his return.  In the drawers, his
fine tasteful shirts and ties; in the closets, those attractive suits,
silk lined, agreeable to the touch, varied and always tasteful in
pattern.  She went back to his books—to the poetry, of which he was
particularly fond.  The volumes fell open naturally at poems that
glorified the lofty, the spiritual side of love.  Then, like a scorpion,
scuttled across the page of Browning’s "Last Ride" what Winchie had
said—"He looks at you like papa does."  She shuddered, was all dread and
foreboding again.  Was there no such thing in man as love for woman, but
only its coarse and lying counterfeit?

She heard an outside door open noisily.  She darted along the hall and
down to the angle of the stairway, to the landing from which the
drive-front entrance could be seen.  She leaned over the balustrade,
looked.  She drew back, stopping the glad cry that rose to her lips; for
it was Basil.  With features composed she leaned forward again.  His
soft hat and his rain coat were dripping; evidently, in his eagerness to
arrive, he had crossed the lake in an open boat, instead of coming round
by the road in a closed carriage.  He was gazing toward the sitting-room
door with an expression that thrilled her—and at the same time gave her
the courage to treat him as her self-respect and her ideas of decency in
a man dictated.

"Back already?" said she in a pleasant, indifferent tone.

He turned, looked up at her, his face alight.  "How are you?" he cried.
"It seems an age."

"We didn’t expect you for several days yet," she went on, descending.
When she reached the hall, he was waiting with extended hand.  "It _is_
good to be here again!" said he.  "It was worth going, for the pleasure
of getting back."

She shook hands, smiled friendlily, continued on her way to the sitting
room.  He hesitated, an uneasy look in his eyes that did not escape her.
He put his hat and coat on the rack, followed her.  "I _am_ glad to be
back!" said he.

She laughed, friendlily enough, but her baffling manner only increased
his uneasiness.  "We’re glad to have you," was her polite reply.  "If
you want to go to your room before supper, you’d better hurry."

"I’ve been doing a great deal of thinking while I was away."

"Really?  That’s good."

"I see you’ve changed your mind—as I felt you would, when I thought it
over.  Your first impulse was to be lenient.  But when you fully
realized what a dishonorable thing it was for me to do—to——"

"Don’t you think you’d better go up before supper?"

"Not till I’ve said one thing," replied he doggedly.

"Well?"

"I want you to know that you can trust me never to repeat my offense.
I’d go to Vaughan and tell him and apologize——"

"And, pray, what has Richard to do with it?" inquired she coldly.

"I understand," he hastened to protest.  "I’m not going to speak of it
to him.  It might put unjust suspicion of you in his head——"

There she laughed outright at him.  "You are making yourself perfectly
absurd," she said, and turned away to go into the dining room.

When he came down, the others were at table.  Dick, figuring on his
yellow pad, glanced up, rose, greeted him with unprecedented cordiality.
"Why, when did you blow in?" he exclaimed.

"A few minutes ago."  Gallatin glanced at Courtney. The quiet mockery of
her absent gaze made him red and awkward.  "I—I—got through—so—I—came,"
he explained with stammering lameness.

"Naturally," said Dick.  He had taken up his pencil. "Make yourself at
home."

Gallatin’s glance fell on Winchie frowning at him. "Howdy, Winchie?"
said he.

The boy made a curt bow, resumed his supper.  He was permitted—or,
rather, under Courtney’s system of training him to think and act for
himself, he permitted himself to eat only certain simple things, and
very little of them—and he was wonderfully sensible about it.  When he
finished he kissed his mother good night, made his salute to his father
and, almost imperceptibly, to Gallatin, and went upstairs.  Gallatin
nerved himself to several efforts at beginning conversation with
Courtney.  Each time, as he glanced up, he was checked and flung back
into embarrassed silence by seeing in her absent eyes the same
disconcerting mockery.  After supper, Richard hurried away to the
library.  When she showed that she was going upstairs, Gallatin detained
her.  "One moment, please," he pleaded humbly.  "What have I done to
offend you?"

Courtney flushed.  But the raillery came back instantly. "I’m not
offended.  I’m amused."

"At what?"

"At you."  The smile broadened charmingly.  "So you’ve had a successful
trip?"

"Yes—in a way."

"And have come back completely cured."

"I want you to be my friend—if you will.  I repeat, you can trust me
now."

Her eyes sparkled dangerously.  "It’s fortunate I understand men—and
have a sense of humor."

"I know I deserve any punishment you choose to give," said he.  "And
I’ll take it.  Only—I want to stay on here—and to have your friendship."

She studied him critically.  Her expression would have been trying
enough in its penetrating judicial intelligence for the least
self-conscious of men.  It utterly disconcerted Basil, bred in the
fashionable world’s incessant consciousness of self.  But in his
desperation he withstood her look, returned it with eyes that were
appealing yet not abject. It pleased her that he was not abject.  "After
all, you went on my advice, didn’t you?" said she in a friendlier tone.
"And you’ve been most manlike—have shown yourself to be just what I
thought you.  So I’m really unreasonable."  She gave him her hand.
"Yes, let us be friends."

"And you forgive me?"

She smiled queerly.  "That’s asking too much.  I may—in time.  Just at
present—you’ve made me feel horribly cheap and—common."

He hung his head.  "If you knew how I’ve suffered for it," he said.  "I
was afraid you’d send me away—would never see me again."

"Let’s not talk about it," cried she, angry at her own weakness in not
meting out to him what he apparently expected and certainly deserved.
But she was not so angry that she held to her purpose of going upstairs.
Instead, she sat at the piano and began to dash off the noisiest pieces
she knew.




                                  *IX*


The friendship now throve like Courtney’s best-placed flower bed.  She
had always been healthy; so she had not a touch of "temperament"—which
is the misleading romantic name for internal physical conditions
anything but romantic.  Most of those who have mentality have also
imperfect health through neglect of physical needs; and the somberer
shades, the grays and blue blacks, made the more melancholy by
imagination, usually canopy their lives. But with her it was not so.
Always healthy in body and in mind, she now irradiated perfume and color
like the rose that is getting just the right sun and rain.

Late in that summer there were several weeks when one perfect day
followed another like a child’s dream of fairy-land.  Vaughan wished to
work alone, dropped completely out of their life, was forgotten.  Every
day, all day long, she and Basil were together, he helping her at the
pastime that kept house and grounds beautiful.  She was one of those
human beings who abhor disorder; if anything went wrong it was righted
at once.  If a knob came off a door or a plant withered, she could not
rest until the imperfection was remedied.  It kept her incessantly
occupied, but the results were worth the pains they cost.  Her
imagination, stimulated by Basil, planned many changes in grounds and
gardens, changes that would bring the place still nearer the landscape
artist’s three ideals—contrast, variety, bounds concealed.  And she and
Basil together carried out these alterations.

Then there were the leisure hours, as full as the hours of toil.
They—with Winchie—strolled in the woods on the farm, across the highway,
and picnicked under the trees beside the brook, or in the shadow of some
gigantic fern-covered rock left on a hillside by the retreating glaciers
of the ice age.  Or, they went out on the lake, Winchie fishing, she and
Gallatin talking in low tones or happy in sympathetic silence, with the
boat moving languidly where the shadows of the great weeping willows
were deepest, its keel troubling the dark clear waters hardly more than
a floating leaf.

She was fond of talking, he of listening.  And she had so many things to
say—the things that had been accumulating in those five years when she
had said little, had read and thought much.  When Basil did talk it was
usually of what he had experienced in his wanderings over Europe and
Asia.  And, as she had been everywhere in fancy through her reading, she
drew him out with questions that made it hard for him to believe she had
not actually viewed with her own eyes.  He seemed a wonderful person to
her, he who had lived in the world’s half dozen great capitals, had
wandered all over the earth and had seen everything. Her comments
astonished him, made him ashamed, and privately reverent of her "woman’s
intuition.  No wonder it’s considered better than brains."

"I wish I’d had some one like you along when I was chasing about," said
he.  "It was usually horribly dull, and I went on at it chiefly because
I was always hoping something interesting would turn up.  Now, I see it
was turning up all the time.  You have a light way of looking at things.
A man sees only the serious side."

"Oh, it couldn’t be dull—not anywhere on earth," insisted she.

"No—not with—that is, with somebody like you along."  An awkward
silence; then, "and I don’t see how you ever learned so much without
having experience."

"I don’t really know things," confessed she.  "I just _seem_ to know.
As a matter of fact, I’m frightfully innocent."

"That’s the beautiful part of it," said he with enthusiasm.

"I hate it!" she cried.

"Oh, no," protested he.

"Yes, hate it," she insisted.  The chief pleasure in this friendship
with him was that it gave her freedom to be herself, to be frank.  She
would not let him spoil it for her, as Richard had in their early
married days spoiled even the times of closest intimacy with formalism
and restraint.  "I want to know—I want to _live_," she went on, with
glowing, eager face.  "I’ve always felt proud it was the woman who had
the sense to eat the apple.  I detest innocence.  I love _life_!"

"Oh, you don’t mean exactly that."

"Just that."

"Even—sin?"  This, not an inquiry, but an argument proving her beyond
question in the wrong.

But she replied undauntedly: "It seems to me, the only way to learn is
by doing things.  And doesn’t that mean making mistakes—sins, as you
call it?  Life’s a good deal like gardening.  You have to do it wrong
first in order to learn how to do it right."

"That’s all very well for a man.  But——"

She was giving him one of those disconcerting eerie glances from the
mysterious eyes.  "I’ve got to _live_, and in the same world you have.
Also, I’ve got to bring up a boy to live in it."

"I must say," confessed he, "I don’t see just how to meet that."  And
she accepted the answer as evidence of his broad-minded sympathy.  She
did not realize that he was anything but convinced, but was simply
admitting the "light cleverness" of her reply and was too eager about
standing well with her to combat her "queer ideas."


The interruption to the delights of this friendship came before she had
nearly exhausted his novelty, and while she was still as uncritical of
him as a starving man of the cooking.  However, in any circumstances it
would have been long before she could have made any accurate judgment of
him.  She had become his partisan; and a generous nature takes the most
favorable, the always too favorable, view of a personality to which it
is attracted.

Until that summer Richard had been, for a young man, remarkably careful
about regularity and exercise.  At the very outset of his task, away
back at Johns Hopkins, seven years before, he had realized that he was
in for an investigation of all known elements in every possible
combination—that is, for a long and hard struggle for about the most
jealously guarded of nature’s secrets—the origin of heat.  And he knew
that, if he was to win any victory worth while, he must resist the
temptation to overwork, and must make health his first consideration.
And although he had small liking for physical exercise and was as little
fond of the grind of regularity as the next man, he had kept to his
rules for himself with the same inflexible firmness that characterized
him in all his serious purposes.  But Basil’s coming with the additional
money he had needed, and the help, too, tempted him beyond his
resistance.  In exercise, as in everything else, there is system or
there is nothing.  Before Basil had been there a month Richard was
breaking his rules; and soon the whole system went by the board.  All
summer he had not exercised, and he ate at any hours or not at all.
Such a reversal of a long-established routine could not but create an
immediate internal commotion.  There were no physical surface signs; he
looked the same as always; but his temper became uncertain.  Where he
had been simply absent-minded he was now irascible in it.  Without
reason—except the internal physical turmoil he himself did not feel or
suspect—-he would burst from abstraction to attack Gallatin or Courtney
or Winchie or one of the servants, or to rave against everything and
everybody.  And this new Richard appeared at just the time when it would
stand out in sharpest, most odious relief—most dangerous contrast to the
even temper of Basil Gallatin.  Under the stimulus of her friendship
with Gallatin, Courtney had got back much of her former gayety.  Again
she was overflowing with jest and laughter, with the joy she seemed to
have absorbed from the bright things that grew or flitted and flew in
her gardens.

The change in Richard came rapidly, yet was so gradual that its cause
escaped them all.  It is not in human nature to be inexhaustibly patient
even with the vagaries of an obvious invalid.  Where the illness is
unsuspected, patience with its victim soon turns to gall.  This new
development in Richard’s character—for Courtney and all the others
assumed it was character—changed her passive, almost unsuspected
resentment and indifference into dislike that could easily deepen into
aversion.

He was disagreeably reminding her of his existence; he was saying in
effect "Look at me!"  She looked.  She had bowed to fate, had accepted a
loveless life of duty. She had done her part loyally.  She had made a
home, had kept it in order, had submitted whenever his physical
necessities began to distract him from his work.  Yes, she had accepted
all the degradation without a murmur.  And when love had come to her
unsought, had tempted her, she had put the temptation aside.  In order
that his plans might not be upset, she had taken the hard instead of the
easy way to combat this temptation, had let Basil Gallatin stay on.  And
what was her reward?  Whenever Richard spoke, it was to say something
disagreeable, to be as nearly insulting as a well-bred man could become.

"It’s perhaps fortunate for Richard," reflected she, "that Basil showed
the true nature of his love in that trip to Pittsburg.  For what do _I_
owe Richard Vaughan? Is there any woman anywhere who does not in her
heart feel she’d be justified in doing _anything_, when her husband has
treated her as mine has treated me?"  And the obvious answer—that her
husband was the normal husband, that it was she who, expecting what the
conventional and customary marriage relation did not contemplate and did
not provide, was in the wrong—this answer seemed to her no answer at
all, but an insult to her intelligence and her self-respect.

Because of Vaughan’s rages Gallatin got into the habit of rising from
the table as soon as he finished and leaving the Vaughans to themselves.
Courtney, with the sex charm subtly seducing her to seek and exaggerate
merits in Basil, was deeply moved by this thoughtfulness; for it
increased her humiliation to have him there when Richard lost control of
himself.  One evening, as they finished supper, Vaughan was suddenly
infuriated by the stealthy fiend of indigestion that is the chief cause
of humanity’s faults of temperament, from morbidness to acute mania.  He
burst out at Gallatin—sprang from absent-mindedness with flaming eyes
like a madman from ambush.  "You messed everything to-day!" cried this
unsuspected and unconscious invalid, sicker far than many a one in bed
with doctors and nurses.  "You simply raised the devil.  Another day or
so like it, and I’ll not let you come into the shop."

Gallatin made no reply.

"I suppose you’re cursing me," fumed Richard. "That’s the way it always
is.  The whole world’s mad on the subject of self-excuse.  Somebody else
is always to blame, and criticism is always an outrage."

"Not at all," said Gallatin, and Courtney knew his self-control was
wholly for her sake.  "I was stupid to-day, Vaughan.  It was wholly my
fault.  I know I came near blowing up the shop and sending us both to
kingdom come——"

An exclamation of terror from Courtney halted him. She was pale, was
looking with frightened, questioning eyes from one man to the other.

Vaughan blazed again.  "There you go!" cried he to Gallatin.  "Now,
she’ll think I’m at something as dangerous as a powder factory—when, in
fact——"

"Yes, indeed, Mrs. Vaughan," interrupted Gallatin. "It was my stupidity
that made all the danger.  Really, we do nothing that ought to be
dangerous."

"That’s not true," said Courtney quietly.  "I know the truth now.  And I
never thought of it before!"  She could not understand how she had been
so unthinking; it was another, an unexpected measure of the cleavage
between Richard’s life and hers.

"You’d better confine your attention to things you understand," said
Vaughan.  "It was all Gallatin’s folly, I assure you."

"That’s the truth, Mrs. Vaughan," said Gallatin earnestly. "The whole
truth."

She said no more, but her face showed she did not believe him.
Gallatin, depressed and remorseful, went out on the veranda, strolled
down toward the lake.  Vaughan sat on, pulling savagely at his cigar.
He was enraged because his outburst had caused the disclosure of the
secret he had intended to keep from her, had given her a false idea
which, as she was a woman, a creature of notions and whims, nothing
could ever correct.  He forgot his fine philosophy about self-excuse,
and turned his rage from himself to her.  "It’s really all your fault,"
he exclaimed, glowering at her.

Winchie, seated between his father and mother, took up his knife and
raised it threateningly against his father, his gray-green eyes ablaze.

In another mood Vaughan would have been secretly delighted, would have
gravely accepted the rebuke and made apology to the boy and to Courtney.
But the devil—the realest devil that torments spirit through flesh—was
in him that night, was on the prowl.  He pointed his cigar at the
infuriated child.  "What’s the meaning of this?" he demanded.

"Winchie," said Courtney, in a low, firm voice.

The boy’s eyes shifted from father to mother.

"Put down that knife, go upstairs and go to bed."

Son and mother looked at each other fully ten seconds; the boy lowered
the knife, laid it on the table, descended from his chair, marched
haughtily from the room. When he was gone Vaughan said: "You should have
made him apologize to me."

Courtney did not reply.  She was pulling out the bows the flowing tie
she was wearing under the loose collar of her shirt waist.

"I’ll have Lizzie bring him back."

"No," said Courtney, and her eyes met his.  "You will not interfere with
Winchie.  I do not interfere with your work."

"But you do!" Richard burst out.  "It’s your interfering that’s making
Gallatin so worthless."

She shrank back in her chair, hastily veiled her eyes. Now it was the
cuffs of the shirt waist that were engaging her attention.

"You dislike him, I know," Vaughan went on.  "But why do you treat him
so badly?"

No answer.  She could hardly believe that it had been so long since
Richard had noted her and Basil.  Besides, when had she ever treated him
in a way that could be called badly?

"I am sure you treat him badly.  Why?"

No answer.

"I asked you a question.  Politeness would suggest——"

"Not in this family," said Courtney, cold and calm, her slim fingers
touching her hair here and there.

"All I’ve got to say is, it’s no wonder Gallatin’s becoming useless at
the shop.  He must feel his position acutely.  I can conceive of no
reason why you should subject a gentleman—and my guest—to such
indignity."

Courtney looked as if she were sitting quietly alone.

"Has he been making love to you?" demanded Vaughan.

Her eyelids fluttered, but it was the only sign she gave.

"Some time ago I observed he had a way of looking at you that was most
loverlike."

Still no answer, and no sign.

"Even so, you could deal with him tactfully.  He is a gentleman."

"You said that before," observed she, elbows on the table, her chin on
the backs of her intertwined fingers, her gaze upon the bowl of
old-fashioned yellow roses in the center of the table.

He glowered at her.  "So I did," said he.  "Now I say it again, and
perhaps you will be able to grasp it. And I want you to treat him as a
gentleman should be treated.  So long as he is my guest, so long as he
conducts himself like a gentleman, you must be courteous to him."

No answer; no change.

"Do you hear, Courtney?"

"Yes."

"What do you intend to do?"

Up went the long lashes and the deep green eyes burned coldly at him.
"As I choose," said she.  "And I may add, I will not put up with your
bad temper any longer.  At the next outburst from you, Winchie and I
leave this house.  I will not be insulted, and will not have my boy
ruined by his father’s bad example."

Richard’s eyes softened; he lowered them, the red mounted.  After a
silence he said "Excuse me" without looking at her, rose and went to the
veranda.  When she finished giving directions for the next day to Nanny
and was going upstairs, he was still walking up and down, head bent,
hands behind his back, sternness in that long aristocratic profile.  An
hour later, as she sat at her desk in her own sitting room upstairs, she
heard his voice at the door into the hall.

"May I come in?" he asked.

"Certainly," replied she.  Her back was toward the door.

"I want to beg your pardon."

"Very well," said she, her voice cold and even.  She did not realize how
much this meant from a man who had not the apologizing spirit or habit.
And if she had realized, she would have been no more appreciative.

"You do not accept it?" said he, ruffled at once, and feeling that she
was now the one in the wrong.

"I do not care any thing about it, one way or the other."

He was silent for a moment, then: "I hardly blame you," said he, with a
great air of generous concession. "I’ve been out of temper,
rude—disgracefully so—for some time.  I’m sorry."  And he stood looking
at her expectantly, more complacent than penitent.

"I see you think a few words are enough to make up for all you’ve done."

"What more can I do?  It’s not a bit like you, Courtney, to——"

"And what do you know about me?" inquired she, turning half round and
looking calmly at him over her shoulder.  "It’s quite true," she went
on, "that I have no means of support but what I earn here as your
housekeeper and—wife.  But, I——"

"Courtney!" he cried in a tone of imperative rebuke.

"A few plain words—of truth—seem to shock you more than your own
conduct."

"Such language from you!  But you did not realize what you were saying."

"I did.  I meant just what I said."

"That is not language for a wife to use to a husband."

She rose from the desk and, without looking at him, went into her
bedroom, closing the door behind her.

She was working in the garden beneath the west windows. She moved among
the flowers, as restless and graceful as any other of the elves always
hovering about blooming things—bees, humming birds, butterflies.  It was
a rare chance to study the marvels of pose of which the human body is
capable.  Now she was stooping, now kneeling; bending forward, backward,
to one side; or, erect and stretching upward, to relieve a tall rosebush
of a dead leaf or spray.  And the lines of her figure, ever changing,
were ever alluring.  Her arms, too—and her neck—how smooth and slenderly
round, and how intensely alive!  Her whole skin seemed aureoled with
invisible, tremulous, magnetic waves.  She was wearing a big pale-green
garden hat; her hair was perfectly done, as always—as if it had taken no
time or trouble, yet so that it formed a delightful frame for her small,
delicate face, and splintered and reflected every stray of sunlight that
dodged in under the brim.  Her short skirt revealed slim, tapering
ankles and small feet.  There are feet that are merely short; then there
are feet such as hers—exquisitely small—not useless looking, but the
reverse.  The same quality of the exquisite was in her figure.  She was
small, but she was not short. Her smallness enabled a perfection nature
never gets in the long or the large.  She made largeness suggest
coarseness.  Women of her form send thrilling through their lovers the
feeling of being able completely to enfold and to possess.

All alone and thinking only of the flowers, she entered one of the
narrow paths that led toward the veranda.  She stretched upward to
re-curl a refractory tendril.  Both arms were extended, her head thrown
back, the rosy bronze face upturned—pathetic, yet laughter-loving mouth,
eyes of deep, deep green.  Like one awakening from a profound sleep she
slowly became conscious that she and Basil Gallatin were gazing into
each other’s eyes with only the trellised creeper between.  And his look
made her heart leap.  She straightened herself, colored, paled, stood
trembling.  The next thing she distinctly knew, he had come round to the
lawn at the edge of the garden in which she was working.

"How you startled me!" she said, in a careless, casual tone.

As he did not answer, she glanced at him.  He was standing with eyes
down.  And his look made her vaguely afraid.

"Are you going to help me to-day?" she asked, resolved to brave it
through.

"I can’t stand it!" he cried, his voice trembling with passion.  "I love
you.  I must go.  I shall go as soon as Vaughan comes back.  Until then
I’ll keep to the other part of the grounds."

"Why not just do it, and not talk so much?" she demanded, suddenly
angry.

"If you had ever loved," said he humbly, "you’d understand. But I didn’t
intend to say these things.  I came to tell you Vaughan’s away.  They
telegraphed for him to hurry to Washington—something about the duties on
a lot of new instruments."

"How long will he be?"

"Several weeks, perhaps.  He’s going afterwards to Baltimore, and then
to Philadelphia and New York.  He left word with Jimmie about sending a
trunk after him. He had just time to catch the express.  He asked me to
explain to you."

Nanny appeared at the drive-front corner of the house. He said to her:
"Oh—Nanny.  I’ve been upstairs packing a few of my belongings.  Will you
have them taken to Mr. Vaughan’s apartment at the shop?"

"Jimmie says Mr. Vaughan locked everything up down there, and took the
keys, and said no one was to go near it while he was away."

Basil hesitated, but only for an instant.  "How forgetful he is!" he
exclaimed with a smile.  "Of course I’ve got to sleep there—as watchman.
Well, I’ll force the stairway door.  You can telephone over for a
locksmith this afternoon or to-morrow.  He’ll make a new lock and key."

Nanny departed, muttering.  She did not like disobedience to the head of
the house of Vaughan; but, on the other hand, she would have liked it
much less had Gallatin stayed on at the house with Mr. Richard not
there.  Gallatin turned to Courtney.  "Would it be too much trouble to
send my meals to the shop?" he asked, in a constrained, formal tone that
deeply offended her.

"Nanny will attend to that," replied she, eyes cold as winter seas.

"Thank you.  If you should need anyone—there’s the telephone to the
shop.  I’ll re-connect it."

"You needn’t bother."

"There have been several robberies round here of late, and——"

"As you please....  Thank you."

He looked at her as wistfully as a prisoner at the fields of freedom
beyond his cell window.  She seemed impatient to resume work; he went
reluctantly away.  She stood gazing after him until he disappeared in
the shrubbery at the far eastern edge of the lawns.  Then she sighed and
glanced at the unblemished sky as if she thought it was clouding.

Three uneasy, tedious days and two wakeful nights. In the third night,
toward one o’clock, she tossed away her book, put out her light, and
opened all her shutters as usual, to air the rooms.  "If I opened his
door and window, I might get a breeze," she said to herself.  "It’s
terribly close."  She crossed the hall, entered the room Gallatin had
occupied, raised a window, and leaned upon the sill—it was the small
window beyond the end of the balcony, and so did not extend to the
floor.  The sky was clear; the moon was hidden by the house.
Stillness—peace—beauty—beauty of view and of odor—the lake with its dark
banks, trees tossing up into the blue-black sky and shimmering with
moonlight—perfumes of foliage and flowers and of the fresh-cut grass in
the meadows beyond the highroad.

"It’s as if everybody in the world were dead except me," she murmured.
She listened again to get the weird effect of utter absence of sound.
This time she heard the faint plaint of a cricket, appealing for company
in its blindness and solitude.  Then—her nerves became tense. From the
balcony, which ended just a few feet to her left, came a stealthy
sound—like a step.  Softly she crossed the room—the hall—her own room,
to the high-boy.  She took from its top drawer her pistol.  She returned
to Gallatin’s bedroom—noiselessly unlocked the shutters over one pair of
the long windows opening on the balcony—unbolted one of them and held it
ajar.  Yes, there was some one on that balcony.  Several of the
neighbors had been robbed; now, it was their turn.  The pistol was
self-cocking.  Taking it in her right hand, she drew back the window
with her left, stepped out.  She thrust the pistol into the very face of
the man.

He sprang back.  She saw what looked like a knife in one hand—nothing,
apparently, in the other.  At the same instant she heard him cry
"Courtney!"

The pistol dropped from her nerveless hand to the balcony floor.

"It’s I!" Gallatin exclaimed.  "I heard a second-story window go up very
softly—I was walking and smoking in the path.  I came—climbed a
pillar—and——"

"O God!  God!" she sobbed.  Down she sank to the floor, her face buried
in her hands.  "My love!  My love! And I almost killed you!"

He knelt beside her.  "Dearest—"  He put his arm round her.  Instantly
he drew away and sprang to his feet.  Up she started, gazing wildly
round.  "What is it?" she exclaimed.  "Where?"

"Nothing—nothing," was his confused answer.  But already she had felt a
thrill from where his arm, his hand had been, and understood.

A stifling silence.  He said: "I must go now.  I’m sorry to have
disturbed you."  And with his conventionality that was of instinct he
lifted his hat and made a dignified bow.  In her hysterical state, she
did not miss the grotesque humor of this; she burst out laughing.  She
leaned against the window frame and laughed until she had to wipe away
the flowing tears.  He stood staring blankly at her, with rising
offense, as he, always sensitive about himself, suspected she was
laughing at him.  For his sense of humor was not nearly so keen as she
had been deceived into thinking by his store of jokes and songs, of odds
and ends of amusing cleverness, all entirely new to her, and therefore
seeming practically original with him.

"What is it?" he said stiffly, when she was somewhat calm.  "I should
like to laugh, too."  It seemed to him characteristic indeed, but most
untimely, this display of her utter incapacity for seriousness.

"Hysteria—reaction—and your everlasting good manners," replied she.  "Is
there anything on earth that would make you forget you are a gentleman
from Philadelphia?"

"Nothing but you," answered he bitterly.  "Good night."

"Wait a second—please," she pleaded.  And—why, she could not have
told—she went on, to her own surprise, "The other day you said you had
changed your mind and were going."

"Yes."

"Isn’t that—cruel?  I’ve learned to—to depend on your friendship."

He did not answer immediately.  When he did, his voice betrayed his
agitation.  "I’m going because my manhood demands it.  It may be
weakness, but if I stayed I should—should go all to pieces."

"I can’t argue against that.  But there’s one thing: As you’re going, I
want to be able to feel that there’s no blot on our friendship.  I’ve
been condemning you unheard. Tell me——"

She paused.  He felt how embarrassed she was. "What?" he asked gently.
"Anything you wish to know?"

"Did you go to—to Pittsburg because—because—I sent you?"

He did not answer; it was too dark to make out his expression.

"I told you," she went on, speaking rapidly, as soldiers advance at a
double quick, where if they advanced at ordinary pace they would have
time to think, to be afraid, to turn and fly, "I told you to go back to
your old haunts and cure yourself of—of your fancy for me....  You
went?"

"You could suspect that!"

"If you did, don’t lie to me.  Say so, and I’ll never think of it again.
I’d understand.  I’d—I’d—forgive."

"There is no woman for me but you," he answered, drawing a step farther
from her and putting his hands behind his back.  "I went because my aunt
telegraphed for me.  I came as soon as I could get away."

She clasped her hands and pressed them against her bosom.  She leaned
toward him, eyes like two of the few large stars in that summer night
sky.  "I am so glad," she murmured.

"Why did you suspect?  How could you?  Why did you care?"

"I was—jealous."  The confession was almost inaudible.

"Courtney!"  His arms impulsively extended.

She waved him back.  "Go—go!  I am upset—hysterical. Forget what I said.
We are friends again.  There is jealousy in friendship, too.  Good
night."

He hesitated.  There she stood, all in that flimsy white—her coils of
soft fine hair about her small head—her arms, her throat, her face
tantalizingly half revealed in the dimness.  "Courtney—do you love me?"

"No—no—not that," answered she, softly, hurriedly, pleadingly.  "But I
like you—and I’m a woman—and—and that tells the whole story.  Good
night, Mr. Basil."  She held out her hand.

He did not take it.  "I dare not touch you—to-night," he said.  "I can’t
be trusted—nor can you."

"No," she assented, letting her hand drop.  She drew a long, deep
breath, and he also—a draught of that intoxicating air, surcharged with
perfume and moonbeams and the freedom of the midnight outdoors.

"We are friends—through and through?"

"Yes."  His reply was in the same low, hushed voice as her question.

"That is so much—so much."  Their nerves like their voices were tense
from the restraint of the passionate emotions damming up higher and
higher within.

"And I’ll see you at breakfast—and thank you for coming....  Good night,
Mr. Basil."

He bared his head.  She did not feel like laughing now at his
"everlasting good manners," but was shivering, with hot tears in her
eyes.  He said "Good night, Mrs. Courtney."

Slowly she went in at the window of his room.  Just as she was about to
push the bolt, she opened it again. "You must come in this way," she
said.  "I’ll let you out at the front door."

"No, I’ll go as I came."

"Nonsense!"

"If any of the servants——"

"You make me feel guilty—when I’m not.  Come!"

He entered the room.  Both began to close the window.  Their hands
touched, hesitated, clasped.  She was in his arms, his lips were upon
hers.  A long kiss.  Her form relaxed; she drew her lips away to murmur,
"Hold me.  I’m—faint."  Again their lips met, and he clasped her to him
until he could feel the wild pulsing of her blood against his face,
against his chest, against his arms—could feel it in every part of that
small form, so utterly within his embrace.  "Don’t," she gasped.  "It is
too much—too much."

"I love you—I love you.  You are mine—yes, you are, Courtney!  There is
nothing but love."

She gently released herself, swayed, leaned against the casement, looked
up into the summer starlight.  Again he seized her, and again his lips
found hers.  Her head dropped upon his shoulder.  A sound—one of those
creakings that haunt the stillness of a house in the night hours. She
startled, stiffened, shut her teeth upon a scream.

"It was nothing," he said.  He, too, was rigid, with every sense alert
for danger.

"What have we done!" she exclaimed.  They stood silent, facing each
other, overcome with shame, burning with longing.  "Oh—Basil!"

He took her in his arms.  But she pushed him resolutely away.  "No—not
again," she said.  He looked at her; she gazed up into the sky.  "Love!"
she murmured.  "Love! And I—must not."

"I forgot—forgot!" he cried.  "O God—Courtney—I love you more than
honor."  And he opened the other the door windows, rushed past her,
vanished round the corner of the house.  She sighed, shivered, stepped
out upon the balcony, stood at the rail until she saw a dark form
rapidly cross the lawns toward the shrubbery densely inclosing the Smoke
House.  She looked all round—sky—lake—woods.  "It is so lonely," she
sobbed.  "So lonely!"




                                  *X*


Ten minutes before breakfast time a knock at the hall door into her
bedroom.  She knew who it was that could not reach above the lower
panels.  "Come in!" she cried. Winchie entered—stopped short on the
threshold.

"Good morning, Mr. Benedict Vaughan," said she, nodding at him by way of
the mirror before which she was arranging her blouse at the neck.  And
he knew she was in a particularly fine humor.

"Have we got company?  Who?" he asked.

"No.  Why?"

"Aren’t you going to take me for a walk after breakfast?"

"Of course.  Don’t we always go?"

"But it’s raining."

"I know."

"Wouldn’t it spoil that dress?"

"One’d think you had a sloven for a mother.  Don’t I always dress?"

"But that’s a long skirt.  And you’re not putting on a shirt waist."

"I’ll change after breakfast."

"Oh."  This, however, contented him for a moment only.  He eyed her
critically as she made one insignificant little change after another,
displaying a fussiness quite unusual.  "I guess we’re to have
company—maybe."

"Not at all.  We never have people to breakfast. What _are_ you puzzling
about?"

"Why didn’t you put on the rain dress?"

Courtney’s delicate skin was showing more than its normal color.  She
shook her head laughingly at him—this child whose questions were forcing
her to see a truth she was striving might and main to hide from herself.
"You don’t like this dress?"

"Yes, I like ’em all.  It isn’t the dress, exactly."

"Then what is it?"

"I don’t know.  It’s—something.  It made me think company right away."
The bar of music from the gong came floating up from below.  "There’s
breakfast!" he exclaimed.  "Are you ’most ready?"

"Quite," replied she, with a last look at profile, back hair and back of
skirt with the aid of a hand glass.

"Maybe there’ll be company," said Winchie as they started.

"I’m sure there’ll be corn muffins," said she.  "I smell them."

"If there’s hash, may I have a little?"

"A little."

The descent was slow as Winchie’s legs were short.  She listened at
every step, but could hear no sound of the kind she hoped.  At the
sitting-room door she glanced round. He was not there.  "He’s in the
dining room," she said half to herself.

"Who, mamma?"

Courtney startled, flushed.  "What is it, dear?" she stammered guiltily.

"Has papa come?"

"No, I was thinking of Mr. Gallatin."

Winchie drew his hand from hers.  But she did not note it; for they were
at the threshold of the dining room, and no one was there but Lizzie.
She and Winchie sat, but she did not begin.  A moment and she went to
the telephone in the hall, took down the receiver of the private wire.
Soon she heard in Basil’s voice, "Hello.  What is it?"

"It’s—I."

"Oh."  Then silence.

"Did you hurt yourself last night?"

"No, not at all—thank you."

In a constrained voice: "I thought you were coming to breakfast."

"I felt it was better not to."

"Oh!—good-by."  And she hung up the receiver.

Back in the dining room, uneasy under Winchie’s serious steady gaze, she
winced at his first remark: "Mr. Gallatin’s company.  There’s you—and
me—and the rest’s company."  After a pause, doubtfully: "Except papa.
He’s not quite company, I guess."

"Do you want some of the hash?"

"You said there wasn’t to be company."

"Please!  Please!" she cried.  "You’ll give me the headache."

"You said I was always to say what I had in my brains."

She bent over and kissed his hand.  "And so you must."

"Do you say everything that’s in your brains?"

She reddened again.  "Everything Winchie’d understand," replied she.
"After a while, when you grow up, you’ll find a lot of things in your
mind that it’d be of no use to say because nobody would understand—a lot
of things you won’t understand yourself."

"There is those in, already," said he solemnly.

She laughed.  "No doubt."

As she did not encourage him, he addressed himself to the hash, which
was the kind he liked—brown and not too dry, and with the potatoes in
little cubes.  She poured her coffee, just touched one of Mazie’s famous
corn muffins as she slowly drank it, and gave herself up to the clear
and calm daylight reflections that make comment so cynical and so severe
upon what we do and say and think under the spell of night.  She put on
a waterproof hat and suit, leggings and boots, and issued forth for a
two-hours’ tramp with Winchie, who was dressed in the same fashion. When
they got back at ten, she felt she was not the same woman as the one who
had the adventure with the burglar on the balcony.  She saw Winchie into
dry clothes and settled at his rainy-day games—then out she went again.
She walked rapidly along the path to the Smoke House; was soon rapping
at the heavy iron door of the laboratory. She rapped again and again,
turned away angry, was almost back at the edge of the shrubbery when she
remembered that Richard had locked the laboratory, that Basil could not
possibly be there.

She hesitated, returned to the Smoke House, knocked at the door of the
stairway leading up to the suite.  No answer.  She opened it, went
upstairs.  At the top she paused, called, "Anybody here?"

Basil appeared in the doorway of the sitting room.  He was in a
dark-blue summer house suit, a cigarette in the corner of his mouth.
His face was very red; his eyes did not meet hers.  "Lizzie straightened
up and left about half an hour ago," said he.

"I came for a look round," explained she, admiring, without seeming to
do so, his elegant and fashionable suit, the harmony of its color with
his soft négligée shirt and flowing artist’s tie.  But then she always
liked the way he dressed, the way he wore his clothes.  "I come once a
week in the morning to keep Lizzie up to the mark," she went on.
"You’re down in the laboratory at that time, so you haven’t known what a
model housekeeper I am."

He did not stand aside for her to enter.

"I also had another reason," pursued she.  "Please don’t choke up the
doorway.  I’m coming in."

He bowed, stood aside.  She entered, glanced round the sober but not
somber room with its walls, ceilings, floor, and furniture of walnut.
It was a comfortable place and beautifully clean.  "Jimmie attends to
the floors?"

"Every week."

She glanced into the adjoining room—kalsomined walls and ceiling, a
white oak floor, a big chest of drawers, a big mirror, a big table and
chair, a roomy brass bedstead. "Any complaints?"

"Everything perfectly satisfactory," he assured her.

"Now for my other business—my real business," said she, disposing
herself in one of the window seats.  "You may continue to stand, if you
prefer; but it would please me better if you sat."

He seated himself stiffly at the table desk.  Her eyes were dancing with
amusement at his overelaborated formality. It made him seem such a boy,
made her feel vastly wiser and stronger and older than he.

"Why didn’t you come to breakfast?" she inquired in a most businesslike
tone.

"I made up my mind not to see you again until Vaughan returned."

"And then, to go away?"

"Yes."

"Why?"

"I prefer not to answer that."

"Why not?"

"It’s true Vaughan and I are not exactly friends. Still, I’ve been
disloyal.  I shall be so no more."

She clasped her hands round one knee, looked at him with half closed
eyes.  "I do not like to be regarded as part of some one’s else
belongings," said she.  "I belong to myself."

"I wish to God you did!"

"You attach too much importance to what a woman says and does on
impulse.  I was much upset last night. I said and did things that seem
absurd to me in daylight."

"I am just as absurd, as you call it, in daylight as I was in
moonlight."

She flinched, controlled herself, made an impatient gesture.  "Don’t say
those things, or you’ll spoil everything," she half pleaded, half
commanded.

He strode to a window across the room from that in which she was
sitting.  "Everything is spoiled.  I’ve simply got to go."

"No."  She shook her head slowly.  "You will stay, and we’ll be friends
again, as before."

"If I could only wipe out last night!" he cried, and he wheeled upon
her.

She caught her breath.  "Do you mean that?" she asked impulsively.

He stopped short, faced her, but his eyes were down. "No, I don’t,"
replied he.  "And that’s the devil of it."

"Why?"

"If I honestly regretted last night, I could stay."

"Why do you lie to yourself?" she asked, crossing the room toward him.
"You have no real intention of going."

His gaze sank.  "I shall try to go," he muttered.

She laughed—after she had returned to the safer distance of the window
seat.  "What a passion for hypocrisy you men have.  ’I shall try.’  You
hope that last tiny rag of a remnant will cover your real purpose."

"You think I am a dishonorable dog.  I don’t wonder at it."

"No, I don’t.  But I do think you are taking yourself entirely too
seriously.  You don’t want to go, do you?  And I don’t wish you to go.
And Richard doesn’t want you to go."

"He’d compel it if he knew."

"But he doesn’t know.  Maybe, if I knew some things about you, I’d want
you to go.  Maybe, if you knew me thoroughly, you’d be eager to go.  As
it is, we all want things to stay as they are."

"Last night was a warning."

"Yes," she hastened to assent.  "Let’s heed it.  Let’s go back to
friendship and not wander.  My friend, you’re letting your mind hang
over just one subject, just one side of the relations of men and women.
Isn’t there more to me than—that?"

"Courtney!" he protested.

"Then let’s be friends.  Let’s put aside what we can’t have.  Let’s take
and enjoy what we can.  Let’s not talk or think about—about love—any
more than one frets about not being able to visit the moon.  We’ve been
finding life happy these last few weeks, with that subject never
mentioned.  Why not again?  Are you too weak?  Am I too uninteresting?"

"I tried once before and failed."

"But now that we’ve looked the situation straight in the face—now that
we’re both on guard—don’t you think we can do better?"

"I don’t know," he confessed.  "I’m afraid to try—aren’t you?"

Her eyes held him, they were so mysterious.  "Not so much as I’m afraid
not to try," replied she slowly.

He dropped into his chair again, sat staring at the blotting pad on the
desk.

"Had you thought," she went on, "what would happen if we owned ourselves
beaten and fled from each other?"

He presently lifted his eyes, looked at her in wonder. "And that never
occurred to me!" he cried.  "Why, our only chance now is to stay here
and fight it out.  If we shirked and tried to escape—"  He paused.

She nodded gravely.

"If I went away, it’d only be to come back—desperate. And you——"

He did not finish his sentence.  They sat silent a long time.  "It would
be horribly lonely with you gone," said she in an absent, impersonal
way.  "And loneliness breeds such wild longings."

A long silence.  Then she rose.  "Come up to the house and help me with
those plans for a kitchen garden under glass," she suggested.

He nodded without looking at her, as if to show her that he understood
all and accepted what was beyond question the less dangerous of their
alternatives.  "As soon as I dress, I’ll be there," said he.

"I forgot.  I must change, too.  In an hour?"

"Less."

They shook hands in an emphatically comradely fashion, and she went.
The former conditions were restored.  They would not permit them to be
interrupted again.  They would demonstrate that, with a thousand,
thousand other things, interesting, amusing, to talk and to think about,
they could bar out love and keep it out.

An hour over the plans, then they had dinner, laughing and joking
together like two children.  They did not heed or even note the gloom of
Winchie and old Nanny—she was waiting, as it was Lizzie’s day out.
Winchie sat mum and glum, eating in the deliberate way Courtney had
taught him and never lifting his jealous eyes from his plate.
Nanny—middle-aged, homely, prim with the added sourness of those who
have never had the least temptation to be otherwise—Nanny glowered at
Gallatin every time she came into the room.  She had disapproved of him
from the outset and had made no secret of it.  This gayety of his, in
the absence of the head of the house of Vaughan, changed that dinner for
her into a Babylonish revel.  She was shocked at Courtney’s taking part,
but was not surprised.  What was to be expected of the weak and
frivolous younger generation of her own sex, mad about adorning the
body, scornful of the idea of "settling," and incredulous as to hell
fire?  Her anger concentrated on Gallatin.  He was a man; he seemed a
serious, moral man.  Yet here he was, leading on the vain, weak woman—he
a guest of Mr. Vaughan’s—trusted by him—put upon his honor.  "It’s
enough to bring Colonel ’Kill back a-harntin’," muttered she into the
oven....  Early in the afternoon it cleared gloriously.  Outdoors, the
two trespassers upon ancient propriety giddied into still higher
spirits.  And after supper!  They banged on the piano and sang "coon"
songs and became so hilarious "that you’d think the settin’ room was
full," said Jimmie to his aunt.

Nanny scowled at the blue yarn sock she was knitting with wrinkled,
rheumatism-knotted fingers.  "Such goings-on!" she growled.

"Why not?" demanded Jimmie.  "Where’s the harm? And I reckon Mrs. V.
knows how to take care of herself."

"Who said she didn’t?" snapped Nanny.

Toward nine Courtney and Basil went out on the veranda.  It was a
perfect August night.  The honeysuckle in great masses upon the rail was
giving forth an odor that quieted them like pensive music.  Under the
trees and among the bushes the now pale, now bright lamps of the
"lightning bugs" shone by scores and hundreds. There was a moon, sailing
high and almost full.  She thought she had never been so happy in her
life.  At former happy times there was in her no such capacity to
appreciate and enjoy as experience had now given her. And what an ideal
companion Basil was—so much the man of the world, wise, experienced, yet
simple and amazingly modest.  And how marvelously they fitted into each
other’s moods!  She had never thought to find a human being with just
the right combination of qualities—one who could be serious—always in an
interesting way—and also as light as the lightest.

"Look at those elder blossoms," said Basil in a low voice, as if louder
tones might break the spell and dissolve the beauty, delicate, fragile,
unreal.

Elder bushes were the outer wall of the eastern shrubbery; their
flowers, soft, feathery mats, deliciously sweet to smell, looked at that
distance and in that light like a wall of snow.  Courtney and Basil
descended from the veranda, strolled across the lawn.  She lifted her
head, seemed to drink in the beauty with her whole face, and to exhale
it in a newer, subtler loveliness and perfume.

"How sweet the boxwood hedge is after to-day’s rain."

As they neared the water’s edge, all other perfumes yielded to the
powerful, heavy, sensuous odor of the locust blossoms, in white clusters
above the bench on which they presently sat.  They were silent, gazing
across the lake where, in contrast to the darkness and silence of their
shore, lay the town, a shimmer of light, a murmur of confused sounds
mingling pleasantly.  Down the lake, far out beyond the edge of the
heavy shadow flung by the trees, a boat was coming, the man rowing, the
girl playing the mandolin and singing.  The tinkling of the mandolin and
the fresh young voice floated over the waters to Courtney and Basil.
She drew in her breath sharply, with a sense of alluring danger
hovering.  The boat drew nearer; the sounds were clearer—clearer, more
tender, more moving. The mandolin tinkled.  The free, sweet young voice
sang: "I want you—ma honey!—yes I do!  I want you—I want you——"

She clasped, clinched her hands in her lap.  Basil started up.  "I can’t
bear it!" he cried.  "I can’t!"

"No—no!" she exclaimed, and her strange look suggested a soul drowning.
"Go—go quickly!"  And drawing her white shawl about her shoulders, she
fled into the house.




                                  *XI*


"Where’s Mr. Gallatin?" asked Winchie, as he and his mother were
finishing breakfast next morning.

"At the Smoke House, I guess," replied she.  There was a far-away look
in her eyes, and their lids were heavy. Although Lizzie had been
unusually unsuccessful in arranging the flowers, she left the bowl
untouched in the center of the table—a solid mass of carnations which
she could have changed into a miracle of lightness and grace.

"Is he coming to breakfast?" asked Winchie.

"No—at least, I suppose not.  How’d you like to go to grandpa’s?"

"Will Mr. Gallatin go?"

Courtney’s cheeks flushed.  "No," she said.

"Then I’d like it—for a while."

"We are going to-morrow," said Courtney.  "To-morrow morning."

"Is grandpa sick?"

"No.  Nobody is sick."

"Then why?"

Courtney’s face wore a queer smile.  "We’ll help grandma and Aunt Lal
and Aunt Ann put up fruit and jam and preserves."

"Will we stay long?" inquired the boy anxiously.

"Until—until your father—gets back."

Winchie looked much downcast.  "Why?" he asked.

"Why not?" said Courtney.  "And now, you’ll help me pack and I’ll help
you."

It was a busy day, as there were many things to arrange besides the
packing.  Gallatin did not appear at the house all day, and Courtney did
not expect him.  Toward ten that night the packing was finished and
everything ready for an early departure.  Courtney went downstairs and
out across the moonlit lawn.  Slowly, with gaze straight ahead, she
strolled toward the lake, toward the summer house in the copse at the
western edge of the grounds.  She entered, curled herself up on the
broad seat, her elbow upon the rail, her hand supporting her chin.  She
watched the moonlight in the ripples along the middle of the lake.  From
time to time, she lifted her head, strained her eyes into the encircling
shadows, then resumed her attitude, mental as well as physical, of
forlorn abstraction.  Something less than half an hour, and when she
lifted herself to glance round for the third or fourth time, she did not
sink back, but slowly straightened, her breath coming quickly.

"Who’s there?" she called softly, addressing the deep shadows over the
path by which she had come.

No answer but the chorus of tiny creatures murmuring excitedly in every
crevice and beneath every blade and leaf.

"Who is it?" she demanded, but not loudly or nervously.  She stood up.

"Only I," came in Basil’s voice, and he advanced and stood between the
entrance pillars of the open rustic pavilion.

"Oh!" said she.  And she resumed gazing over the water, but did not
resume her seat.

"I saw you cross the lawn," he explained.  "And I was afraid some one
might intrude."

"Thank you," said she gratefully.

"You knew it was I—didn’t you?" he went on.

A brief silence, then—"Yes," she admitted, and gave a little laugh.

"Why do you laugh?"

"Because I just realized that I was expecting you—that I came here
hoping to see you.  How one does lie to oneself!"

"Do you wish me to leave you?"

"No....  What a beautiful night it is!"

"The loveliest I ever saw."

"These locust blossoms—  The perfume makes me feel languid—but not
sleepy."

"I guess it is the locusts," he said.  "I feel that way, too."

"I’m taking Winchie to my father’s for a visit—in the morning."

"So Jimmie said."

"We’ll stay until Richard comes back."

"I supposed so."

A silence.  Then she: "I must go in soon," and an instant later, without
realizing it, seated herself.

"I wrote to Starky—Estelle—to-day....  To ask her to fix the date for
the marriage."

She shivered.

"I decided it was best for me to commit myself."

She buried her face in her hands.

"And," he went on, "you know I shall always love you—_always_! ... I say
that because—in a few minutes now we’ll part, and never see each other
again."

With her face between her hands, she gazed at the dancing surface of the
watery highway of moonlight, and repeated monotonously—"never see each
other again."  Then, after a moment, "How heavy the perfume of the
locusts is."

"Yes," replied he, "but so sweet."

Then the thin film of surface over their emotions suddenly burst.
"Never again—oh, my Courtney!" he cried between set teeth.  Both had
thought all day that they were calm and resigned.  They knew now how
they had been deceiving themselves.  He flung away from her. Both knew
what was coming, knew it was too late to save themselves, felt the wild
reckless thrill of terror and rapture that precedes the breaking down of
all barriers, the breaking up of all foundations, the free sweep of
unfettered passion.  So young—so young—with such a long stretch of empty
years—and they never to see each other again!

"How can I live on, without you to help me?" she said.

"It’ll be easier for you than for me.  You have—your boy.  I
have—nothing."  He sat down, away from her, stared into the blackness of
the copse.  "Nothing," he repeated.  He was holding his breath and
waiting for the inevitable storm to break.

"Basil!" she cried, and in impulsive sympathy reached out and touched
him.  "Won’t it be something—to know that you have my heart—my—love?"

She felt him trembling, and there was a sob in his voice as he answered:
"But when your arms ache with emptiness, you can put them round Winchie.
While I—Courtney, how can I touch another woman, when it’s
you—you—_you_—"  And his groping hand met hers, clasped it.  He bent his
head, kissed her hand—the back, the palm, then the fingers one by one.
And they softly touched his cheek.  "Basil!" she sighed.

The faint wind agitated the clusters of locust blooms; their perfume
descended in heavy voluptuous waves.  He pressed his hands one against
each of her cheeks.  "Courtney," he murmured.  "My love—my dear love!"
Their lips met.

"We must not!" she pleaded, her arms about his neck.

"After to-night," he reminded her, "we, who love, will never see each
other again."

"Never again!" she moaned.

It was the signal both were unconsciously, yet deliberately, awaiting.
He gave an inarticulate cry, caught her up as a strong wind a flower.
"I’ve had enough of right and wrong," cried he.  "You are mine!  I will
not let you go.  I love you—I love you—I love you!"  And he showered
kisses upon her until she, dizzy and fainting, yet never so alive, was
clinging to him, was calling him endearing names, was laughing and
sobbing.  And in that darkness and mad frenzy of longing and despair
they could pretend to themselves that it was all as unreal as a
dream—was, in fact, a dream, or at worst, impulse—irresistible,
irresponsible.


He felt her heart flutter, halt in its steady, strong beat within her
breast close against his.  She raised her head from his shoulder,
listened.  "What is it?" he whispered.

"Listen."

A bird broke from the copse and with a great noise of wings against
leaves blundered away to another and higher place.  "A bird—that was
all," said he.

"Sh—h!  No.  They never stir so suddenly at night without cause."  She
was cold, was shivering.  They looked at each other, tingling with
guilty alarm.

"I’ll go see."

"Yes—do."

He disengaged himself lingeringly, with a parting caress of his lips
along her cheek.  "It’s cold," she murmured.  "And I’m—I’m afraid."
Never before in all her life had she been afraid.

He went softly along the path until the shadows hid him.  After a moment
he returned to the entrance.  "I see nothing," said he.

"And I hear nothing—any more," replied she.  "You don’t know what a
queer, creepy sensation I had.  It was—was—as if some one were near us."

He did not seat himself by her again.  "Isn’t it—very—very late?" he
said hesitatingly.

"Perhaps.  But come, dear.  Let’s forget.  It was nothing.  Oh, I was so
happy—and now—Basil, I’m cold."

Instead of sitting and taking her in his arms he drew her to her feet.
"I saw your front door open," he said. "I think you’d better go."

She flung herself into his arms.  "No—no!" she cried.  "Not yet."

He held her closely, but soon released her.  "You had better go," urged
he, and she felt nervousness and constraint in his tone, in his touch.

She laughed quietly.  "What are you afraid of?"

"Nothing!" he retorted stoutly.  "Still, the door is open, and some one
might——"

"Why, _you’re_ quite cold! ... Basil, what is it?"

"Nothing—nothing at all," replied he, his arms round her again, his lips
upon hers.

Presently she said: "I _thought_ you were neglecting me rather long.
It’s a habit men have after—after a woman is entirely theirs."

"Don’t say those things, even in joke," he begged, so seriously that it
jarred on her overwrought nerves.

"If you take that sort of remarks in earnest," said she, a trace of
resentment in her tone, "I’ll be likely to believe there’s something in
it."

"It was so—so frank," apologized he.

"Why not speak frankly?" said she.  "One of the joys of loving you is
that we’ll be entirely frank with each other.  I’ll never be afraid to
show you how much I love you, or to say whatever thought comes into my
mind. And you must feel that you can be your natural self always, can
speak out any thought you may have, no matter what it is.  All that
doesn’t mean much to you.  But to me—"  She drew a long, deep breath.
"You—a man—couldn’t possibly know how delicious it is to a woman to be
able to be her—her naked self! ... You’re not listening.  You don’t hold
me tightly.  Are you shocked?"

"No," answered he with constraint.  "I keep thinking of—of—that door."

She was silent, offended.

"I wasn’t quite frank with you a moment ago."

"Already!" she sighed.  Then, repentantly: "I know I’m silly.  But it
means so much to me to feel that we—you and I—can stand before each
other, just as we are. Oh, I’ve hidden myself so long, Basil.  Your
love—the great temptation of it was that it meant freedom.  If I were
your wife, you’d expect all sorts of conventional things of me.  If you
were my husband, I’d feel and you’d feel we had to live up to standards
and do customary things. As it is, our love’s free—free!"

He was silent.

"Basil, don’t you feel that way?"

"Yes, dear," he answered absently.  "But—I must tell you.  When I went
out—a while ago to look, I saw Nanny on the porch."

Even in that dimness he saw the terror in her face. "On the porch!" she
gasped.  She sprang up.  "Why didn’t you tell me before?" she cried
angrily.

"I—I thought it might alarm you foolishly."

"I’m not a hysterical fool.  Please don’t forget that—again."

"Courtney!"

"Oh, forgive me—my love."  When they had embraced: "Yes—I must go—at
once....  Why can’t you come with me?  Start as soon as you see I’m at
the door. But you mustn’t cross the lawn.  You must go round by the
shadows.  It would be quite safe.  You needn’t go back to the shop."

"Impossible!"

She was silent, waiting for him to feel how hurt she was and to reassure
her.  But he stood aloof, and presently asked in a constrained voice,
"How long will you be at your father’s?"

"At my father’s!" she exclaimed.  "Why, I shall not go!"

"You must," he insisted.  "You’ve made all the arrangements."

"You can send me away—_now_?"

"Please—dear.  Don’t be unreasonable.  If you changed your plan
everybody’d think it strange."

"Everybody—who?"

"Nanny, for instance."

"Nanny?  Why should I care what Nanny thinks?  My first scare was
only—guilty conscience.  Basil, why are you so queer—so absent
and—distant?  Tell me—just what it is in your mind?"

She rested her hands pleadingly on his shoulders and looked up at him.
In her eyes, as in his, shone the fever of their delirium.  He took her
hands, kissed her.  "Don’t be foolish," he said, trying to laugh.  "I
guess I am a little bit unnerved."

But she was not satisfied.  "Basil—do you regret?"

"Courtney!  Courtney!" he pleaded.  "That’s the way to tear our
happiness down, stone by stone, till nothing’s left but ruins.  You must
not be suspicious."  He patted her reassuringly on the shoulder with an
air of possession.  "Of course I love you, more than ever."

"You say it in a tone that—that sounds like superior to inferior."  She
sighed.  "Is nothing in the world up to its promise?  Here, I thought
we’d be perfectly happy—two pariahs together—two lost souls—but
accepting our punishment of secret shame and hypocrisy—accepting it
gladly, as it was the price we had to pay for freedom and each other.
And already, in the first hour, we’re almost quarreling.  It must not
be, Basil."

"No, dearest," he cried.  "And it will not be.  We will be happy.  Trust
me.  I’m unstrung—and maybe you, too.  But you know I love you—more than
I ever thought.  And really you ought to go in the morning—really,
dearest!  You need stay only two days.  You can come home the second
day.  Don’t you see we must—must—must be careful?  Now that there’s
something to conceal, we can’t act any longer as we did."

She laid her clasped hand on her breast, looked wistfully up at him.
"We can’t ever be free and unafraid again, can we?" said she.  "It isn’t
just one act of—of concealment—is it?—and freedom and openness
afterwards.  I see lies—and lies—and yet more lies—stretching
away—away—until—"  She shuddered, hid her face in his shoulder.  "Oh, my
love!"

"I’d tell all the lies in the world to have you."  He embraced her
almost roughly.  "All—all!  And care not a rap.  You—you are my god and
my morality.  To love you, to have you, to keep you—that’s all.  The
rest is trash."

"Yes—yes," echoed she feverishly.  "The rest is trash. We’ve got the
best.  Love!"

"And we’ll hold on to it—always!"

"Must I go in the morning, when life has just begun?  How can I?
No—no—don’t answer.  I know you’re right.  I’ll go—and ... Good by!"

She flung her arms about him.  He caught up her small, warm body with
its soft curves and its radiations of vivid, perfumed life.  Their lips
clung together.  They separated, laughed dizzily.  She waved her arm and
darted up the path.  From the shadows he watched her cross the lawn,
like some creation of the summer and the moonlight.  In the doorway she
paused, waved to him once more; the door closed.  Then he, like a thief,
sneaked along the retaining walls at the lake shore—now stooping to keep
in the deep shadow, out of sight of anyone who might be watching from
the house—now advancing erect with stealthy swiftness—until he was able
to strike into the darkness of the path to the Smoke House.


Midway in undressing his eyes chanced upon her picture, framed and
hanging opposite the foot of the bed—a large photograph, with Winchie, a
tiny baby, against her shoulder, his fat check pressing upon hers.
Basil stood before the picture, his expression a very human and moving
mingling of awe and adoration and passion. Suddenly he remembered to
whom that picture belonged.  "But not she!" he said aloud defiantly.
Nevertheless, he flushed, hung his head, switched off the light, and
sought his bed. "How can I ever face him?" he muttered.  Then: "She is
mine!  She never was really his.  I take nothing that belongs to him.  I
take nothing she could give, or ever did give, to him."

He fell immediately into a sound sleep—the exhaustion of nerves so long
on fierce tension.  But about two in the morning he started up,
listened.  Yes, some one was moving beneath the window.  He went to it,
looked down. There was Courtney, swathed in a long, dark cloak.  He
thrust his feet into slippers, drew on a big dressing gown, descended,
and opened the door.  He stretched out his arms.

She flung herself against his breast.  "I couldn’t go without seeing you
again," she panted.  "After I left you, and got into bed, I began to
think all sorts of dreadful things about you.  You acted so strangely.
And then I felt ashamed of myself, felt I must come and beg your pardon.
And—and—here I am.  Are you glad?"

His laugh was answer enough.  He took her in his arms, carried her up to
the sitting room, set her down on the sofa.  "How light you are!" he
cried.  "But how strong—I’ve seen you swing Winchie to your shoulder as
if he were nothing at all.  Now—please—won’t you let your hair down?
There never was such hair as yours."

She sat up, let the cloak fall away.  The moon was flooding the room.
As she sat there, with eyes sparkling and small, sensitive face
shy-bold, she looked as if she had sprung to mortal life from an old
folk song about loreleis and nymphs and enchanted princesses.  "You
floated in on the moonbeams," he declared.  "I’m afraid, if I don’t shut
the window, you’ll flit away."

"That’d not stop me," laughed she.  And she began to take her hair down.
Just as it was about to unroll, she paused.  "Wouldn’t you like to take
it down yourself?"

He went round behind her, drew out the hairpins one by one, fumbling
softly, lingeringly for them, keeping them carefully.  Her hair
loosened, uncoiled, fell about her in a shimmering veil.  "Oh, my love!"
he cried.  "My beautiful Courtney!"  And he took the soft, perfumed veil
in his hands, kissed it again and again, buried his face in it, wrapped
her head and his together in it.

She laughed delightedly, then drew away, looking at him with mock
severity.  "And where, sir, did you learn how to make a woman so happy?"

"What things you _do_ say!" he laughed, just a little bit scandalized.
"I might ask the same question of you."

"And I can answer it—" with a mocking smile—"without evasion.
Imagination.  I’ve so often thought—and thought—and thought—what I would
be to a man I freely loved—one I wasn’t afraid of scandalizing.  Oh, I
know I shock you—for there’s a great deal you’ve yet to learn about
women—that they’re human, just like men. But you’ll learn—and then I
think you’ll see I’m good—for I am.  I couldn’t be bad—hate anyone—play
mean tricks, say or do mean things.  Don’t you wish I were tall—wish
there were more of me?"

"I couldn’t live through it."

"And you really—really—love me?"

He held her tightly by the shoulders, gazed into her eyes.  "So much
that, if you were untrue to me, I’d kill you."

"Now, what made you think of that?"

"I don’t know."

Thoughtfully: "I guess it is because I’m giving myself to you when I
am—am—  Now, there you go, shocked again."

He laughed recklessly.  "Give me time," said he, "and I’ll get used to
it.  You say you’d rather I showed just how I felt than locked it away
and pretended."

"Yes—yes—a thousand times!  I don’t mind your being shocked—not really."
With a queer little laugh, "I’m shocked myself.  Somehow I seem to
delight in shocking myself—and you.  Loving you is—all sorts of
pleasures and pains.  I want them all!"

"All!" he echoed.  "Yes—all!"

Midway in her embrace she stopped him, pushed him laughingly away with,
"But you weren’t quite frank a while ago."

"When?"

"There at the lake."

"Why do you think so?"

"Did you ever see one of those little toy spaniels—how they quiver and
shiver all the time?  I’m just as sensitive as that.  You mustn’t try to
deceive me—ever! You mustn’t say or act any of those hypocrisies of what
some people call good taste, either.  They’re not necessary with me.
They’d make me feel deceived.  I might not confess I knew—and then—’The
little rift within the lute.’"

"I guess I’ll tell you," he said for the moment deeply impressed.  "Yes,
I will."

"Tell me everything—_every_thing.  There mustn’t be any
concealment—anything to lie hid away in the depths of some dark closet
to rot and rot and infect the whole house."  She suddenly lowered her
head; and, as the full meaning of her words, the meaning she had not
foreseen, reached him, he, too, became ill at ease.

Presently he said: "I didn’t want to frighten you needlessly.  When I
saw Nanny—she was—just going up the steps of the porch."

Courtney’s eyes widened and her face blanched.  "You think—" she began
when she could find voice.

"I couldn’t tell which direction she had come from," he replied.  "But
it’s no matter.  She couldn’t know."

Courtney remembered the darkness—how grateful she had been for its
friendly aid.  "No," said she resolutely. "She couldn’t know."

"Certainly not," echoed he, as if the idea that she could were absurd.
"But it made me realize how careful we must be."

"Yes," replied she thoughtfully.  "Yes."  And she was clinging to him,
was sobbing.  "Oh, my love—my love—I don’t care what comes, if only it
does not separate us....  Look!  Look!" she cried, pointing out into the
sky.  "Dawn!  I must fly.  Where _are_ my slippers!"

He found them for her, put them on, bundled her into her cloak, picked
her up, and hurried downstairs with her. "I’m not so little," said she.
"It’s because you’re so big and strong.  One kiss—quick!"

He kissed her—on the lips and, as she turned to go, again on the nape of
the neck.  "Day after to-morrow!" he cried.

"Yes, I’ll come here at nine, rain or shine."

And she ran along the path.  The moon had set; it was intensely dark.
Arriving within sight of the house she stopped short.  There were
lights, upstairs and down, shadows of moving figures on the curtains.
"God!" she ejaculated.  "What _shall_ I do!"  And for the first time the
great fear—the fear a woman has when she thinks she has lost her
reputation—buried its talons in her throat and its beak in her heart.
Do?  Face it!  She lifted her head high, gathered herself together,
advanced boldly.  As she entered the front door she ran into Nanny.

"What’s the meaning of this?" she demanded.  In the same instant her
courage fled and she leaned faint against the wall.  "Winchie!" she
gasped.  "Has something happened to him?"

Nanny was standing stiffly with eyes down—a sullen figure, accusing,
contemptuous.  But she answered respectfully enough if surlily: "Winchie
missed you and came up and waked me and Mazie just now."

Down the stairs came the boy, sobbing, shouting, "Mamma!  Mamma!  I lost
you."

Courtney caught him up, hugged him, kissed him. "You silly baby!" she
cried, laughing.  "What a fuss about nothing.  Put out the lights,
Nannie."  Halfway up the stairs she hesitated.  Would it be more natural
to make an explanation or to say nothing?  She decided it was best, more
like her usual self, to say nothing.  "Put out the lights and go to
bed," she repeated.




                                 *XII*


She had said nine o’clock, but it was not quite half past eight, the
next evening but one, when she appeared at the edge of the clearing.  He
was seated in the entrance to the upper story, his gaze fixed on the
opening in the trees where the path emerged.  At first glimpse of her in
the long dark cloak, he flung away his cigarette and rushed toward her.
He embraced her, then held her off as if to reassure himself that it was
really she.  "Do you still love me?" he asked.  "Are you _sure_?"

The emerald eyes flashed up at him.  Her face, revealed in the
starlight, was gravely earnest and sweet. But beneath her calm, as
beneath his, there was evidently still raging the hysteria that had
whirled both clean out of the realm of sanity and sense—the fever that
keeps whirling the soul it seizes from pinnacle to abyss and back again.
"Ever since we separated," said she, "I’ve been imagining I was
struggling to give up our love.  But as the time for me to come got
nearer and nearer, I realized what a fraud I was."

"Do you love me?"

"I am here."

They sat side by side in the entrance.  "May I smoke?" he asked.

"Do."  As he opened his cigarette case, "Let me have one."

"I didn’t know you smoked."

"Oh—a little—at college.  We girls used to do it, for the sensation of
being devilish.  Wouldn’t you like me to smoke?"

"If you wish to."

"You don’t approve?"

"Well—I don’t exactly like for women to smoke or use slang.  Those
things seem sort of unsexing.  Of course, it’s only an idea."

She smiled indulgently, rolling the cigarette to loosen the tobacco, as
Basil did, with a great air of being an old hand at it.  "I’m afraid
you’re narrow."

"I guess I am."

"Gracious!  What you must be thinking of me!"

As she said it, she gave that little audacious laugh of delight in her
freedom to be frank.  But he became grave, and it was with deep
earnestness that he answered, "I love you."

She, too, was grave and thoughtful now.  "What a difference that does
make!  Then everything—anything seems all right."

"And is!"

She put her arm through his.  "Here, take your cigarette.  I’ll not
distress you."

"No—do smoke."

"I’ll confess the real reason.  It makes such a nasty taste in my
mouth."

He tossed his cigarette into the grass.  His every gesture—and
hers—betrayed what a strain they were undergoing, how deceptive was
their appearance of sanity.

"Now, what did you do that for?" exclaimed she.

"I oughtn’t to smoke when I’m going to kiss you."

She put her cigarette to his lips.  "Please," she urged, "I like you to
smoke.  Don’t you know a woman likes everything, even the unpleasant
things, that make a man different from her? ... Smoke, and tell me what
you’ve been doing.  It’s forty hours since we were together."

"I’ve been conscious of pretty nearly every one of them," said he.
"I’ve done nothing but think of you."

"Sad thoughts?"

"Very.  But I’ll not do that again.  What’s the use, Courtney?  We’ve
got to have each other.  What’s the use of struggling against it?"

"I can’t realize it—I can’t," said she absently.  "Last night—out at
father’s—I got up in the middle of the night and ran and looked at
myself in the glass.  And—"  She paused.

"Yes?"

"I could look myself straight in the eyes and tell myself what I had
been to you, and not feel like hiding. Is it that I’m not doing anything
bad or that I’m so bad I don’t know good from bad?"

"It’s love," declared he gloomily.

"I can look back now and see that from the beginning—from the day I saw
you cared—I’ve been coming straight to you.  I was lying to myself."

"I, too," he confessed.  "Courtney, we’ve been—and are—in the clutch of
a force that’s stronger than we."

"I—don’t—know," said she slowly.  Then, with her arms round his neck,
"and I don’t care.  If conscience tolls its ugly bell, I’ll shout ’Love!
Love!’ so loud that it’ll be drowned.  I must have love—I will have
love. And how can I help loving you, who are so altogether wonderful in
every way?  You’ve only kissed me once since I came."

"Twice."

"And what’s twice?"

For answer he gathered her into his arms, carried her up to the sitting
room.  With all of her within his arms, he sat in the big armchair.
"Now!" he exclaimed.  "We’ll be happy!"

"Yes.  Oh, _what_ a scare when I was here before!"

She sat up and told him about Winchie’s raising the hue and cry for her.
He listened with a somber countenance. When she had, finished he said,
"And where’s Winchie now!"

"In bed—asleep."

"But—if he wakes!"

"Why, he’ll lie perfectly quiet till he sleeps again. I told him never
to repeat that escapade."

"But he may get frightened——"

"You forget, sir," said she smilingly, "he’s my child. He could not be
afraid....  What a mournful face!"

"I’m horribly jealous of him."

"If Winchie didn’t keep us apart, he never could push us apart now."

"I’m very selfish," he said despondently.  "I want all—all!"

"Here we are—sad again."

He sighed.  "And in a few minutes you’ll have to go."

"Why?"

"You can’t stay away from the house.  Something might happen."

"Croak!  Croak!"

He passed his hand impatiently over his face.  "I’m a fool!" he
exclaimed.  "I must learn to be content with what I have—when it’s so
much—so vastly more than I ever dared hope—or—"  He stared out into the
darkness. The ducks among the reeds close inshore were quacking
discontented forebodings of rain.  "I trifle with my good fortune."

"What’s the matter, dear?" she asked, her cheek against his.

"Nothing.  Nothing."

"What have you been thinking while I was away? ... Look at me, Basil."

"It seems to me I can’t ever look—anyone in the face again."

She understood who "anyone" was.  She pressed closer to him, said
caressingly: "Except me.  You can always look at me, and I at you.  And
what more do we want?"

He did not echo her tender reckless laugh, with its threat of a storm of
hysterical tears.  "You have good excuse for what you’ve done.  But
there’s no excuse for me."

She seemed to be shrinking within herself.  He gently put her on the arm
of the chair, went to the window, stood there with his back to her.
"The truth is, I’ve been in hell since you left, Courtney—a hell of
remorse!"

"Remorse!  Excuse!"  Her bosom heaved; her eyes flashed.  "Oh, you men!
What hypocrites you are! ... Tell me, do you wish to give me up?"

He faced her.  "I cannot give you up," was his inflexible reply.

"Then dismiss all these gloomy ideas," urged she. "Excuse?  You think I
have the excuse of—of his indifference, of his tyranny and bad temper—of
his——"

"For God’s sake, Courtney, _don’t_ say those things!"

"I think them—you think them.  Why not say them?"

"Yes—you are right.  I am a hypocrite."

"How easily we hurt each other," she sighed.  Then, "But how easily it
heals, too."  She went on: "We were talking of excuses.  Anyone can find
an excuse for anything.  Only weak people look for excuses."  She
elevated her head proudly.  "I want no excuse for what I did, for what
I’m doing.  I need no excuse.  Do I not own my heart, my self?  I have
the right of my youth, of my love.  Isn’t that enough?"

"The right of our love!" he exclaimed, as gay and confident as he had
been depressed and doubtful.  "We’re wasting time.  Let’s talk and think
only of love."  And he drew her down into the chair, into his arms.
"Courtney—when he does come—promise me you will not—will not——"

There he halted, for the wave that passed over her as she lay in his
arms told him that she understood.  "You know I will not," she said.  "I
belong to _you_, now."

"But he may——"

She laid her fingers on his lips.  "Trust me," she said.  "I’ve planned
it all.  Only, that’s the one thing we mustn’t ever talk about."  She
laughed, with desperate straining to be audacious.  "There is honor,
even in the dishonorable."

"You—dishonorable?  I, perhaps—yes, certainly. But you—you belong to
yourself.  It is I who will play the part of dishonor.  You can be as
cold and distant as you like.  I must smile and pretend to be a friend."
He shrugged his shoulders, laughed unpleasantly.

"That’s manly!" exclaimed she, nerves instantly unstrung.

"What can you expect of—of _me_?" he replied, so down that she
straightway relented.

"Let’s drop this subject, dear," she pleaded.  "Let’s never speak of it
again—and think of it as little as possible. It’s one of the conditions
of our life.  We will admit it—and ignore it."

"How can we drop a subject that crops out, comes to the tips of our
tongues, every time we look at each other? But be patient, dear.  I
shall grow hardened——"

"Oh, but you must not, Basil!" she cried in dismay. "_We_ must not.
That’s our danger, and we must fight it.... Isn’t it pitiful!  If we
were two coarse people, mere animals, merely the ordinary man and woman,
why, we’d be happy and never give remorse a thought."

"If we suffer more, we enjoy more," said he, clasping her as if some
power had tried to snatch her away.  "When I feel ashamed, Courtney, all
I have to do is to remember your hair, to feel again its soft splendor
on my face, between my fingers—and I am delirious."

"Love—always love!" she murmured.  "No price too great to pay for it."


They heard steps—stealthy steps—upon the walk, just under the bedroom
window.  "Yes, yes, I hear," he whispered, as in the darkness she
clutched his arm.  He went to the open window, she sitting up, rigid,
wide-eyed, with bated breath.  Keeping in the shadow, he glanced down.
He saw a man, half hidden in the shrubbery.  A moment and his eyes
focused so that he saw the outline of the man’s face, the angle of his
head—saw that the man was peering up toward that very window.  He went
softly back to her.  "Go into the sitting room," he said.  "I think it’s
one of those prowlers."

"Sh-h!" she warned.  "Listen—  On the stairs."

Both stopped breathing and listened.  It was the faintest of sounds, but
unmistakable.  Yes, it was a robber.  He was ascending the
stairway—slowly, silently, steadily, up and up, step by step.  Now they
would miss the sound altogether; then it would come again—nearer,
softer. Their hands were clasped—were like ice, but without a tremor.

"How did he get in?" she breathed.

"Don’t you remember?  I left the outside door unlocked—wide open."

"Sh-h!"

"Go back into the sitting room," he whispered.

"No—I stay here with you."

The awful sound, so faint, so relentless, was in the hall.  "Go!" he
commanded.  "You’d be in my way, dear.  If I need you, I’ll call."

She saw that he was right—that at least he must not feel hampered.  She
pressed his hand, glided into the sitting room.  Suddenly she almost
cried out.  "Is the bedroom door locked?" she called in a hoarse
undertone.

He made a silent dash for it, to lock it.  Too late. It opened.  He
could see nothing in the black hall.  He made a forward leap, right hand
clinched, left hand open and ready to inclose a throat.  His fist thrust
past the man’s head, but his left fingers closed upon the throat, and
his weight bore the man to the floor.  But the prowler was not taken
wholly by surprise.  Basil instantly realized how fortunate it was that
he had got the initial advantage. The two grappled; a short, sharp
struggle and Gallatin felt the form under him relax.  He took an even
stronger hold on the throat, planted his knee squarely in the chest.
"I’ve got him!" he cried to Courtney.  "Go!  Go!"

But he triumphed too soon.  With a tremendous effort the prowler tore
Gallatin’s fingers from his throat.  "Good God, Gallatin—is it _you_?"
he gasped.

"Vaughan!"

Gallatin dropped all to pieces.  But Courtney was instantly herself—and
more.  On went the lights, and she burst out laughing.  Gallatin rose,
staggered over to the window seat.  Vaughan, not without difficulty,
picked himself up from the floor, gazed savagely from Gallatin to his
wife.  She kept on laughing, more and more wildly, laughed until she
fell into a chair, sat there laughing, with the tears rolling down her
cheeks.  "Was ever anything so ridiculous!" she gasped.  And she looked
from one to the other, and went off again.

Vaughan, straightening his collar and coat and waistcoat, appealed to
Gallatin.  "What’s the meaning of this?" he demanded.

By way of reply Gallatin stared at him, as if debating whether or not to
renew the attack.

"What does this mean, Courtney?" Vaughan said to her sharply.

"That’s what _we’d_ like to know," replied she.

"Why did Gallatin——"

"Serves you right," interrupted Courtney.  "Why did you come prowling
round here?  Why didn’t you go home?"

Vaughan looked sheepish.  "Well, I wanted to make sure everything was
all right here."

Courtney smiled with resentment in her raillery.  "You were more anxious
about your workshop than about your wife and child."

Vaughan reddened.  "Oh, I knew everything was all right at the house,"
he stammered.  His glance fell upon the tumbled bed.  "Why!" he
exclaimed.  "Some one’s living here!"

Gallatin, startled, was standing up with his hands clinched.  But she
had no fear.  She did not feel guilty toward this man, who was nothing
real to her; and she knew enough about him to know that his absolute
belief that good women were good, and could not stray even in thought,
made it impossible to tax his credulity.  All that was necessary was
boldness.  "Mr. Gallatin is living here," said she composedly.

"Gallatin!" exclaimed Vaughan.  "Why, I locked the whole place up."  He
wheeled on Basil.  "How did you get in here?" he asked.  "Didn’t I make
it plain to you from the outset—didn’t we have a distinct
understanding——"

"Richard!" interrupted Courtney sharply.  "Mr. Gallatin is here because
I sent him here."

Richard concentrated his angry attention upon her. "You!  What right had
you——"

"You will not address me in that tone," said she haughtily.  "You come
back home, like a thief in the night.  You give me a fright.  You half
kill Mr. Gallatin, and then you begin to quarrel.  I repeat, Mr.
Gallatin is here because I sent him."

"I thought it best to live here while you were away," said Gallatin
stiffly.  He did not wish to throw upon Courtney the whole burden, yet
he hardly dared speak, as he could not see how she hoped to extricate
herself and him. In his guilt, in his ignorance of such a character as
Richard’s, he was amazed at her having hope.  He thought her courage
superhuman.

Vaughan glanced, half amused, half disdainful, from one to the other.
"Are you two still disliking each other? I had forgotten that."

"You are mistaken," said Gallatin.  "I do not dislike Mrs. Vaughan."

But Vaughan did not hear.  "What on earth—" he suddenly ejaculated,
staring at Gallatin, then at Courtney—"What on earth were you two doing
here in the dark?"

Gallatin grew white as chalk.  But Vaughan was looking at Courtney.  "We
weren’t in the dark," said she, with never a tremor of eye or voice.
"We were in the sitting room."  As she spoke she threw open the door
between the two rooms.  Gallatin gazed into the sitting room like a man
seeing a miracle.  The lights there were all bright.  The instant she
had heard her husband’s outcry, she had turned on the lights in both
rooms, the buttons being on either side of the same wall just beyond the
door frame; and she had closed the sitting-room door before the two rose
from the floor.

"Come in here," she said, leading the way.  "I kept getting more and
more afraid at the house," she went on in rapid, easy explanation.  "It
was very lonesome—there were several robberies in the neighborhood—and
Nanny and Lizzie and Mazie sleep so far away from my rooms.  I took
Winchie and went home for a couple of days, but it wasn’t convenient for
me to stay there—and so dull!  I came back to-night, and strolled down
here after dinner to make my peace with Basil—"  Here she made a mocking
bow to him—"and to ask him to please come up and guard the house.  How
well you’re looking, Richard!"

"I do feel bang up," said Vaughan, "except here—"  He touched his throat
where Gallatin’s fingers had closed in.  "The trip was just what I
needed.  I went to a specialist in New York, and I serve notice on both
of you that I’ve turned over a new leaf.  I’ll take regular exercise
again—and stop grinding away all day and all evening.  The great
discovery of the fuel that will make it as cheap to be warm as to be
cold can wait.  Perhaps it’ll come the sooner if I keep in condition."

"That’s sensible," said Courtney.  "And you must live at home, and let
Mr. Gallatin stay on here."

"It’s good advice.  I’ll take it," assented Vaughan promptly.  "Being
here tempts me to work when I ought to be resting."  He threw a
good-humored look at Gallatin. "I guess you’re not likely to succumb to
that temptation, old man."

"Not I," said Basil, with the first sickly hint of a smile.

"Gad, it’s good to be home!"  Vaughan was gazing at Courtney now, in his
eyes the proprietorial look, bold, amorous.  "She’s looking
well—eh—Gallatin?"

Basil did not answer.  He was glowering at Vaughan, and biting his lip,
and his fingers were twitching.

Courtney rose.  "Let’s all go up to the house," proposed she: "You’ll
come, won’t you, Mr.—beg pardon—Basil?"

Gallatin stared coldly at her.  Her "superhuman courage" now seemed
sheer brazenness to him.  "Thanks—no," said he in a suffocating voice.

"Hope I didn’t damage you, Gallatin," said Vaughan with the rather
careless solicitude of man for man.

"Not in the least," replied Gallatin curtly.

"Oh, come now, old man," cried Richard.  "Look at my throat."  He
inspected it himself in the mirror ruefully.  "If I can forgive you, you
ought to forgive me. Come along, Courtney."

He took her by the arm, smiling at her, she mustering a return smile.
Basil was looking intently at her, with an expression of cold fury.
When he caught her eye he sneered.  She, already at the breaking pitch,
could not endure that contempt.  She looked piteously at him, gave a low
cry, sank upon the sofa, fell over in a dead faint.

Basil gazed stupidly at her.  Vaughan dashed into the bath room,
reappeared with a wet towel, rubbed her temples and her wrists with it.
She opened her eyes, looked round—saw Basil.  "Take me away!" she
sobbed.  "Take me away!"

Her husband gathered her into his arms as if she were a tired child.
"Good night, Gallatin.  See you in the morning," he said, and strode out
with her.

Gallatin fell into one of those futile rages that are the steam of the
strife between a man’s desire and his courage.  "It’s my love for her,"
he assured himself, "that keeps me from following him and taking her
from him."  He found small comfort in this, however; for, he suspected
it was only part—a minor part—of a truth, the rest of which was
altogether to his discredit.  He sat, he leaned, he stood at the bedroom
window overlooking the path.  Again and again he fancied he saw her, a
new and deeper shadow in the shadows beneath the trees. Whenever the
wind stirred a bush there, his fanciful hope made it her cloak.  He knew
it was impossible for her to return; but he could not give up.  He did
not leave the window until dawn.  Then, he lay on the bed, exhausted,
wretched, burning with hate for Richard, with rage against her, with
contempt for himself.




                                 *XIII*


Toward eight o’clock came Vaughan, in high spirits. Basil, stiff and
sore, was still lying on the bed.

"Sure you don’t want breakfast?" said Richard. Then, getting a view of
his partner’s face: "You _are_ a sight!  I beg pardon, old man.  I’ve
got a few marks, myself.  But—  _You_ must have the doctor."

"No, thanks," was Basil’s surly answer.  "I’m all right."

"But you ought to do something for that eye—and that cheek.  I sure did
give you some hard punches."  As this sounded as if it were—and was—not
without a certain pride, he added: "The worst you gave me are hidden by
my clothes—except these finger marks.  What a stupid thing for me to do!
And poor Courtney’s quite done up this morning.  Really, old man, you’d
better let me send for the doctor."

"I’ll telephone for him," said Basil.  "I want to be left alone."

"Beg pardon.  I’ve done nothing but apologize ever since I got home.
Well, I’ll go to work.  Don’t bother to come down to-day.  I shan’t need
you."

Gallatin muttered "Selfish beast," as soon as Dick was clear of the
room.  And it was undeniable that Dick’s pretense of sympathy had been
rather more offhand than such pretenses usually are.  He had never had
to conciliate and cultivate his fellow beings in getting a living, and
had been brought up indulgently by Colonel ’Kill and Eudosia.  Thus he
was candid in his selfishness, often appeared worse than would a man who
was in reality more selfish, but was through fear or training, less
self-revealing.  However, Basil was not one with the right in any
circumstances to be censorious of such undiplomatic conduct; for he,
too, had been born and bred to wealth and security, and had been
"spoiled" by a worshipful family.

Not for a week did he dare show his face.  Dick called twice a day—did
all the talking—always about the chemistry into which he had plunged
with freshened energy and enthusiasm.  Usually he apologized for
Courtney’s not coming—"She still feels weak and upset," he would say,
"and wants me to make her excuses.  I tell her you’d refuse to see her
even if she could come."

When Basil’s face and complexion were once more about normal, he waited
until Richard was at work downstairs, then adventured the path to the
house.  He found Courtney in the sitting room, in a négligée, sewing;
Winchie was building a lofty house of blocks on the veranda just outside
for her to admire.  He scowled at Winchie; Winchie scowled at him and,
when his back was turned, made a face at him.  "Good morning, Mrs.
Vaughan," said he coldly.  "I’ve come to pack my traps."  In a lower
tone that was menacing, he added, "I want to see you."

She laid aside her sewing, a strained expression in the eyes that shone
wistfully in her pallid face.  The boy dropped the block he was putting
into place and stood up.  "Go on with the house, Winchie," said she.
Then to Basil, "You may come right upstairs."

She preceded him into the study on the left of the upper hall—the study
that had been his, and was now Richard’s.  He, following, closed the
door, advanced toward her with lowering brow and angry eyes.

"It’s very imprudent to close the door," said she, calmly returning his
gaze.  "Nanny is at work across the hall."

"Did you break your promise to me that night?" he demanded.

"I’ll answer no question—not even from you, Basil—when it’s in that
tone."

"First you want me to open the door, so that I can’t speak out," sneered
he.  "Now you evade....  You admit your degradation.  I knew why you
were keeping away from me."

"That was not my reason," she stammered, with lowered head.

"You lie!  You are doubly false.  You have no shame. Now I understand
why you said those bold things—why you acted so free—as no innocent
woman could. You—expert!"

Her eyes were milky like a tortured sea; her face became ghastly; she
trembled so that she had to steady herself at the back of a chair.
"Basil!" she exclaimed.  "No, it’s not you.  What we’ve suffered since
he came has driven you mad.  It has almost crazed me."

"Answer me!" he commanded fiercely.  "Did you or did you not break your
promise to me?"

Suddenly she drew herself up, and with the sad dignity of guilt that has
been expiated she said: "I ask you to pity me."  And she stood there,
pale and haggard, a statue of wretchedness.

His fury could not hold against that spectacle—and she, the proud,
asking for pity!  "It’s I who should be ashamed," he cried.  "How I have
suffered!  What a coward—what a cur I am!"

She rushed to him.  "Oh, my love!  What we’ve been suffering has only
made you dearer to me, dearer than ever! There’s no bond like
suffering."

He was about to take her outstretched hands when suspicion flamed into
his eyes again.  "How easily you twist me round your finger!" he said
roughly.  "Now, there’s your making me move down to the shop.  Why
should you want to get me out of the house when, if I were here, we
could see each other all the time?"

She showed no resentment, felt none.  "It’s natural you should suspect
me," said she.  "I’d suspect you in the same circumstances.  I see now
how absurd it was to dream of happiness founded on lies.  No happiness
for us—not even joy now and then.  If we didn’t love each other, we
might be happy.  But we do love, and misery is all we can expect.  I’ll
tell you why I wanted you down there."  She paused, went on with veiled
eyes and bright red in her cheeks.  "As I said to you, even dishonor has
its honor.  I didn’t want us meeting here—with my boy—and his—so near."

Basil looked as if he were about to sink down under his shame and
self-contempt.  "Forgive me.  What a hound I am!" he muttered.

"As for my free actions and free speech——"

"Courtney!" he begged, seizing her hands.  "Don’t speak of that."

"I must explain," she insisted gently, freeing herself. "I’ll always
explain everything to you.  As I told you, I wanted to be free with you,
perfectly free.  So I said and did the things any woman who loved would
think and feel, but most women hold back for fear of spoiling a lover’s
ideal.  I didn’t want you to idealize me, but to love me just as I was,
just for what I am."

"And I do—I do!" he cried, trying to draw her into his arms.

"Yes, you do, I believe," answered she, insistently drawing back.  "I
know you truly love, and you know I truly love.  I know you are a man
any woman would be proud to have love her, and you know I’m not a low or
a bad woman.  Yet, see how it turns out....  Basil, we must give it up!"

"Give it up!"  He was bristling with suspicion at once.

"You must go away."

He laughed scornfully.  "That is your kind, considerate way of
dismissing me.  What vanity!  I shall suffer no more than you."

"Not so much," she answered sadly.

"I shall go away and marry."

"You can’t make me jealous now, Basil.  Not after what you’ve been to
me.  I mean just what I say.  You must go, and I’ll try to be to my
husband all a wife should be.  If you’d been through what I’ve been
through—that night and since—you’d understand.  Basil, do you remember
how I lied, how I laughed and cheated—like an ’expert,’ as you say.  Oh,
you must have despised me!  If you had done what I did, had done it as
fluently, I’d have loathed you."

"And what about me?  Didn’t I stand there, a contemptible coward, and
let him take you away?"

"What else could you have done?"

"Shown myself a man!"

"And ruined me—and my child?  Oh, no, dear.  You love me too well for
that."  She startled, listened.  "He’s coming," she warned, flying to
the door.  She opened it softly to its full width, advanced composedly
into the hall, saying in her usual voice, "Then Jimmie’ll take your
things down about four o’clock."

Richard, on his way up, had reached the head of the stairs.  "Oh!" he
exclaimed.  "Here you are!  I asked Winchie where you were, and he said
he didn’t know.  So I’ve been hunting all over the place for you.  I
want you to take a walk with me."

"Certainly," said she tranquilly.  "I’m talking business with Basil.  Go
down and help Winchie finish his house, and we’ll take him along.  I’ll
come in a few minutes."

"All right!" said Dick cheerfully.  He shouted out, "Hey, Gallatin,
how’s your grouch?" and descended the stairs, laughing as he went.

As she reëntered the sitting room, she said, with the quietness of the
emotions that are too deep and too terrible for tumult, "Am I not
’expert’?  How long do you think we could keep this sort of thing up
without becoming—I tell you, Basil, looking within myself as I’ve lain
in the dark, I’ve realized it takes decent people—people with nerves and
imaginations and sense of right and wrong—to become frightful, if they
once get on the down grade. Did you hear what he said about Winchie?"

"Yes," muttered Basil.  He was at the desk, his elbows on it, his hands
supporting his head.

"Winchie knew where I was.  Why did he lie to his father?  Already a
liar!"

"I must go.  You are right—  But, Courtney—you must get a divorce."

"I’ve thought of that.  On what ground?  And how can I leave him
alone—take Winchie away from him?"

"You must get a divorce."

"I think so, too," assented she.  "But I will not lie to do it.  I’m
done with lies.  I’ll tell him."

"No—let’s go to him together."  Basil’s face lighted up, his manner
became enthusiastic.  He thought he saw a way to redeem his manhood put
in pawn for this sin so dear yet so detestable.  "Together!" he
exclaimed.  "He is generous and broadminded."

She shook her head.  "Men are not generous and broadminded where women
are concerned—the women they look on as theirs."

He colored and glanced guiltily at her.  But it was plain that she had
not in mind his own exhibition of the male attitude toward the female.
His memory of it helped him to appreciate the folly of his proposal.
But he would not give in at once.  "I’d not suggest it, if he really
loved you.  But——"

"If he really loved me, he’d have felt the truth long ago.  If he really
loved me, he’d wish me to be happy—would give me up.  But then—if he had
really loved me, none of this would ever have happened.  No, Basil, it’s
because he doesn’t love me, because it’s only passion that takes and
gives nothing, that uses and doesn’t think or care about the feelings of
its creature——"

Basil, horror-stricken by this bald candor, ashamed for her, stopped
her.  "Let’s not talk about it," he pleaded. "As for the divorce, I
leave it to you.  You know best how to deal with him."

His manner and its cause had not escaped her, with nerves keyed up to
the snapping point.  Once again he had raised in her heart the dread
lest their love would not mean the perfect frankness, the perfect
oneness of which she had dreamed.  Did a man always demand and compel
concealment and pretense in the woman?  But she thrust out the doubt.
"I’ll do what seems best," she said to him, avoiding his eyes and
speaking with constraint.  "I don’t know Richard very well.  You see, we
never got acquainted. He’s like most men.  They don’t want the woman,
but only the outside....  He’s so wrapped up in his work that I think I
can free myself."

He took her hands, gazed into her eyes.  "Yes," he said, "you do love
me.  You feel that we belong to each other, just as I do.  So when I’m
away I’ll know you are coming—as soon as you can."

"As soon as I can," she replied.  And the expression of her eyes,
meeting his steadfastly, and the deep notes in her sweet voice thrilled
him with a new sense of her love and of her constancy.  This woman had
not given in whim; she would not change in whim.

"I will go—to-morrow," he said.  "The sooner I go, the sooner I shall
have you.  Will you come to-night to say good-by?"

"Don’t ask it, dear.  I mustn’t ever again—until I’m free."

"In the summer house, then.  For a few minutes.  We can’t part like
this."

"Yes, I’ll come."

Along the hall from the foot of the stairs sounded Richard’s imperious,
impatient voice.  "I say, Courtney! Do hurry!"

"I can’t go for a walk with him now," she said, half to herself.  "I’ll
make some excuse."  She looked at Basil, he at her.  In their eyes was a
sadness beyond words and tears. And what would it be when he was really
gone?  "I mustn’t linger here—I mustn’t!" she cried.  "And don’t come
near me when he’s around.  I can’t control myself."

They clung together for an instant, then she fled.

She made vague household matters her excuse for not taking the walk.
She did not see Richard alone until late that afternoon.  She was in her
and Winchie’s big bathroom, which she also used as a dressing room.  As
she sat at the dressing table there, in petticoat and corset cover,
doing her finger nails, he walked in.  "May I come?" said he, already in
the middle of the room.

She glanced at him, or, rather, in his direction, by way of the mirror
and went on with her polishing.  But she was not resentful of the scant
courtesy of this intrusion.  In the beginning of their married life she,
through love, had confirmed him in his life-long habit of considering
only himself and of expecting himself to be considered first. Now,
indifference was making her as compliant as love had made her.  And it
was just as well.  An attempt to assert herself would have seemed to him
a revolt which pride and duty made it imperative for him to put down.
The man a woman has spoiled through love, or the woman a man has
spoiled, must be born again to be got back within bounds.

"You don’t ask how I happen to be home so early—nearly an hour before
supper," said he.

"It _is_ early," replied she absently.

"I’ve made up my mind not to kill myself with work and no exercise, and
to give more time to my family.  I had a chance to look at myself—at my
way of life—from the outside while I was in the East.  And I’m going to
try to live a more human life, though it’ll not be easy to work less,
when Gallatin’s leaving me."

Until he spoke Gallatin’s name she had not heard a word.  We are all
surrounded at all times in our customary haunts by a multitude of
unchanging objects, animate and inanimate.  We become practically
unconscious of them so long as they maintain the same relative position
toward us.  We notice only changes, only those changes that are radical.
Richard had long been to Courtney a mere familiar part of her
environment—as she of his.  She could look at him without seeing him,
could answer him without having really heard.  She could submit to his
caresses without any sense of them.  This unconsciousness was not
deliberate; it was far deeper, it was habitual.  At Gallatin’s name,
however, she began to listen.

"Yes, he’s going," said Richard.

She inspected the nail of her right little finger.  "Is he?" she asked,
head on one side critically and emery slip poised.

"For good.  And I’m not sorry.  He’s of less and less use to me at the
laboratory.  His mind isn’t on it."  There Richard laughed.

"I thought you felt you couldn’t get on without him," said she,
searching in a box for an orange-wood stick.

"That was some time ago.  I suppose you’re glad he’s going."

"Why?"

"I know you don’t like him.  You’ve been very good about it, and I
appreciate your being polite to him.  But I can see that you dislike
him."

She glanced in the mirror, arranged a stray of hair. "You are mistaken."

"No, I’m not.  You’ve got the good woman’s instinct to please her
husband, and you think you’ve conquered your dislike.  But you haven’t."

"How you understand women," said she placidly. "But then there isn’t
much to understand about a woman—a good woman."

"Oh, you underestimate yourself," said he generously. "You’re a very
clever little lady—in your own charming feminine way.  I often admire
it."

A ghost of a smile flitted about her lips; but she seemed more intent
upon her nails than upon his half-absent compliment.

"To confess the honest truth," he went on, "I’ve never liked Gallatin
myself.  I know he’s a good sort—  But—  Well, he has no depth.  He has
a stock of education and a stock of manners, just as he has a stock of
clothes.  But it’s all of some one else’s make; nothing of his own,
except a pleasant, amiable disposition.  And he lacks purpose. However,
all these things—especially lack of purpose—would only recommend him to
a woman.  Women are so frivolously constituted that purpose is a bore to
them."

"Any more of a bore than it is to most men?" inquired Courtney.

Vaughan laughed acknowledgment.  "Anyhow, I couldn’t warm up to him.
He’s going, but he keeps his partnership—at least, for the present."

"Has he gone?"

"Of course not!  He’d hardly be so rude as not to say good-by to you.
Do you know why I think he’s going?"

"Didn’t he tell you?"

"He says a business letter came at noon to-day.  And no doubt it had
something to do with it.  But mere business would hardly take him off in
such a rush.  At first I thought it was a hurry call from some idle
female for him to come and amuse her.  All bachelors get them, and
Gallatin’s just the sort of gander to respond.  But on second thought I
suspected he’s flying because he’s in love with you."

Courtney, conscious that his eyes were on her face, smiled.

"It’s natural that you, being a good woman, shouldn’t notice it."

"Women sometimes think a man’s in love with them when he isn’t," said
she.  "But the woman never lived—good, bad, or both—who didn’t know when
a man was in love with her."

"Well, I may be mistaken.  But he had a queer way of acting.  Why, only
this morning he was lowering at me like a demon."  Vaughan laughed.
"Poor Gallatin.  But he’ll pull through all right."

"No doubt," said Courtney.

"Sometimes—now and then—a man or woman in love, and staying in some dull
place, where there’s nothing to do but brood, does go under, with love
one among the contributing causes," pursued Richard.  "But not a city
person.  And Gallatin’s going to New York."  Something in her expression
made him hasten to say: "Now, please don’t get angry.  I apologize.  I
admit my joking was somewhat coarse.  Naturally it grated on your
modesty.  Really, I was only joking.  I know he’s going for business
reasons. Then, too, he has a grouch for me because of the fearful punch
I gave him.  No, he—any man who has led a free life as long as he
has—could no more appreciate a good woman—a woman like you than—than—a
drunkard could appreciate a glass of pure, clear, sparkling spring
water."

Courtney gathered her manicure set together, swept it noisily into the
drawer.  "Go out, and let me finish dressing," said she in a low voice
between her set teeth.

And he departed, saying: "What a relief it’ll be to have Gallatin off
the place—to have it to ourselves again."

She sat motionless with her eyes down.  Presently she lifted them, saw
her reflection in the mirror.  She gazed in horror.  She had relaxed the
instant he left her alone, and now all her anguish was in her features.
"A little more of this," said she, "and I’d be an old woman."  She
passed her hands over her face, looked into her eyes. "Spring water"
flashed to her mind.  Her eyes wavered and sank; her skin burned.  But
her hungry heart clamored defiantly.

When she reached the dining room her husband and Basil and Winchie were
already at the supper table.  As they rose, Basil did not lift his eyes;
her husband gave her a glance of greeting.  But Richard, the married man
of five years, did not really see her face as it then was, but the face
that had long been fixed in his mind as hers. To have seen her as she
was, he would have had to be startled out of matrimonial myopia by some
shock.  There was no arresting change flaunted in Courtney’s features;
youth has no wrinkles and hollows in which the shadows of emotion can
gather thick and linger.  She simply looked tired and not well.  Her
eyes were veiled; but in her skin there was a lack of the ruddy tinge
beneath the bronze, and in her hair, which was with her an unfailing
index to health or to spirits, there was a suggestion of the
lifelessness that is in the last wan autumn leaves the dreary winds of
November spurn.  In tones that seemed to them more unnatural than they
were, she and Basil exchanged the commonplaces necessary on such an
occasion.  Winchie watched her sympathetically.  Presently he dropped
down from his chair, came round to her.  He put his arm about her neck,
drew her head toward him, kissed her tenderly, and whispered, "Mamma is
sick."

She kissed him, whispered: "Yes, dear, but you mustn’t say anything."

Winchie went back to his place.  The conversation was wholly between the
two men, the subject being, of course, chemistry.  After supper Courtney
pleaded a headache and, having uttered the formulas prescribed for the
parting and having heard from him the formulas embodying his part in
such an exchange, withdrew.  Instead of being agitated, she was in truth
as calm as she seemed outwardly—and numb.  She saw Winchie to bed,
occupied herself mechanically for an hour, then sat at one of the
windows of her front room looking out toward the lake.  When she thought
at all, it was of trifles; most of the time, during those two hours of
waiting, she did not think, but listened to the beating of her blood as
it made the ringing in the ears that climaxes the oppression of an
intense silence.

At length Richard came up.  He glanced in at her. "How’s the headache?"
he inquired, laying a caressing hand on her shoulder.

She moved; his hand fell away.  "No better," replied she.  "Good night."

"You’ll feel all right in the morning," he said.  He kissed her crown of
hair and departed toward his own rooms—those that had been Basil’s.

She heard him stirring about, first in his study just across the hall,
then in his bedroom.  Half an hour, and she went on the balcony, to the
corner of the house, to see if his lights still showed.  All his windows
were dark.  She returned, listened at his door.  No sound.  She stole
down the stairs, unlatched the lake-front door, went out.  She strolled
across the lawn, in full view—for the moon was rising.  At the edge of
the shadows made by the bushes round the summer house, she halted.

"Basil!" she called softly.

He came from the summer house and stood before her. "It’s safer to stay
here," she said.  "We can watch the house."

He made no protest.  He took her hands, drew her to his breast.  Never
before had he touched her without feeling the glow and surge of passion;
now he had no sense of her physical beauty, of her physical charm, only
sense of the being he loved.

"Forgive me the horrible things I said, Courtney," he murmured.  "It
wasn’t I that was speaking.  It was the beginnings of what I was fast
becoming."

"I know, I know," she answered.  "Kiss me, dear."

Their lips met in a caress of tenderness.  When she spoke again she
said: "Dear love, I never felt before how much you care."

"I never realized before.  I’m beginning to realize. You won’t be long
about arranging the divorce?"

"You must not get impatient—or misunderstand—if I’m longer than you
expect."

"I’ll not misunderstand."

"There’s Winchie, you know.  I must have Winchie."

"Yes, indeed.  You’ll accomplish it," he said confidently. "Be careful
not to tell him too much.  Even if he doesn’t really love you, there’s
his vanity.  And that’s often stronger in a man than anything else."

"I’ll not forget what’s at stake....  He suspects that you love me."

"I was afraid so, and this evening I told him I was engaged.  He looked
astounded."

"I can tell him that I love you, and he will think—  No—no—what am I
saying?  Lies, always lies! ... I’ll do the best I can, Basil."

"I know you will."

"You see now I was right in feeling you must go?"

"I felt it, Courtney, the moment we three stood together there in my
room—though I wouldn’t admit it to myself.  If I stayed, there’d be a
crime, or a scandal that’d spatter you with mud and brand you with
shame. It simply could not be otherwise."

"I haven’t told you the real deep-down reason why I felt you must go."

"No," he said.  "Your real reason was the same as mine."

"Because it was all so vulgar and—and cheap?"

"Cheap—that’s it!" he exclaimed.  "Cheap!"

"I could stand it," she went on, "to commit and to have you commit, big,
bold sins, scarlet and black.  I might even glory in it.  I wasn’t a bit
ashamed that first night. I think I even got a sort of joy out of
defying all I’d been brought up to believe was moral and right and
lady-like.  But—  Not when we stood there, like two caught sneak
thieves."

"That was it, Courtney," eagerly assented he.  And he went on, in a tone
in which a less love-blinded woman might have detected an accent of
repentance for masculine thoughts of disrespect: "No wonder I love you!
How happy we shall be, when you’re free.  How good and pure you are—and
innocent.  It needn’t be long—in this State—need it?"

"I think not," she laughed.  "Being a judge’s daughter, I ought to know.
But I don’t."

"Look there!" he exclaimed, gazing toward the house.

She turned, saw a figure at the east corner of the house, apparently
looking toward where they were standing.  The figure moved.  "Nanny,"
she said under her breath.  "I must go."

He caught her to his breast; for an instant they clung together, then
with a last lingering handclasp, she left him, to emerge from the deep
shadow of the trees and stroll back across the lawn.  Presently she
pretended to catch sight of Nanny, halted, changed her course, went
toward her.  "What is it, Nanny?" she asked.

Nanny turned without a word, started to go back toward her kitchen.

"Nanny!" said she sharply.

The old woman stopped, turned.

"What do you mean by not answering me when I speak to you?"

"I didn’t know as you expected an answer," replied Nanny, sullen and
cowed, but insolent underneath.

"I asked you what you were doing here?"

The two women looked straight into each other’s eyes. "I just came out
to get a breath of air—like you," said Nanny.  "I don’t see as there’s
any harm in that."

"Certainly not," said Courtney.  And she resumed her stroll, back and
forth across the lawn for three quarters of an hour.


She did not come down to breakfast.  About nine o’clock Richard, at the
Smoke House, called her on the telephone.

"Gallatin cleared out on the midnight express," said he. "Now, what do
you think of that?"

"Why?"

"He left a note saying good-by and explaining that he found he could
make better time."

"Well?"

"Don’t you think it a little queer?"

"No."

"Anyhow, he’s gone.  I feel better already.  Don’t you?"

"I can’t say I do."

"Well—I’ll see you at dinner."

"Yes—good-by."

She returned to her sitting room, all in a glow.  Basil had gone because
he, sensitive and honorable, wished to spare himself the hypocrisy of a
farewell handshake with Richard—"and to end the suspense," she added.
"The suspense!"  And she struck her hands against her throbbing temples.


A few days and there came from New York a crate of orchids, with only
his card.  "That’s what I call decent and very handsome," declared
Vaughan, roused to enthusiasm by this attention.  "I must say I rather
miss Basil, now that he’s really gone.  Don’t you?"

"Yes," said Courtney.

"Which means no.  Don’t even these orchids soften your heart?  Think how
he used to let you work him.  Oh, women! women!  Orchids cost a lot of
money, don’t they?"

"Some kinds."

"When you write thanking him, do put cordiality and friendliness into
the note."

"Very well."

She sent eighteen closely written pages—a line about the orchids, the
rest an outpouring of love and longing—a sad letter, yet hopeful—and
ending with the injunction that it be left unanswered.  "You must not
write until you hear from me," she said.  "And that will be soon—soon,
my love, my Basil!"

Next day Dick asked, "Have you thanked Basil for those flowers?"

"Certainly."

"I wish you had let me see the letter.  I’ll bet you made it all frost.
You don’t know how cold you are, Courtney. Sometimes you chill even me,
well as I know you.... I guess I’ll write Basil a note, too—and let him
see that we did appreciate his thoughtfulness."

"As you please."




                                 *XIV*


Five days since the letter to Basil, a fortnight since he went, and the
first move toward freedom not yet made. Each day added its strength of
loneliness and longing to the resolve that became the guiding purpose of
her life when she sent him away.  But she must restrain her eagerness,
must compel herself to wait upon opportunity—upon the favorable gust of
event or emotion.  To be tactless and abrupt would mean defeat; for,
hard though it was to realize, she must keep ever in mind that Richard
had legal right over Winchie.  Moral right she denied not only because
he was as much a stranger to Winchie as to herself, but chiefly because
a child belonged to its mother.  Indeed, if she had not been brought up
in a legal family it would not have occurred to her that in any
circumstances she need disturb herself about having Winchie.  There was
nothing of pose or effusiveness about her love for him; it was that deep
and utter love which is not conscious of itself, but simply is.  She and
the boy were as much part of each other as when his being was still
hidden within hers.  She knew that she and Winchie were one; but she
also knew the man-made law.  So in seeking her freedom she must move
carefully.  Sometimes she felt she must be dreaming; it simply could not
be possible that in arranging her life she must take into account a
person so utterly alien and apart as this nominal husband of hers.

She had rarely seen him since Basil left.  He was exercising—walking or
rowing on the lake—very early in the mornings.  But he spent the whole
day at his work. When he occasionally came to dinner or supper, he was
deep in his problems, was as unconscious of his wife and child as his
child was of him.  Courtney was no longer unconscious of him.  As
before, she did not see him when she looked at him, did not listen when
he talked, answered, if answer was necessary, by a sort of reflex mental
action that never involved her real mind.  But she had the sense of his
presence—as keen when he was out of sight as when he sat working or in a
deep abstraction before her eyes.  And she was constantly revolving how
to begin the revolt—for she saw more and more clearly that it would be
regarded by him as a revolt against womanliness, against duty, against
honor, against decency, would burst upon him like thunder from clear
sky, no matter how adroitly she might begin.  Until then his ideas of
woman had impressed her only in a vague, general way.  She had avoided
thinking them out or hearing them from his own lips because she knew
definite knowledge would only make the struggle to be a wife to him as
far as she might the more painful, the more humiliating.  But now, piece
by piece, his conception of womanhood and woman’s place fitted itself
together in her mind from stray sentences dropped by him from time to
time in their five years. Every day she recalled some forgotten or
ignored remark that added to the completeness of the record—and to its
discouragement.  As to the position of woman in the scheme of things, he
was untouched of any modern idea.  He was just where his grandfather had
been; and Colonel Achilles Vaughan had been where the whole world had
been since the Oriental contempt for women reconquered Europe under the
banner of the Cross.

In one of the last warm days she half sat, half lay in the hammock on
the lake-front veranda, apparently idle, really with a brain as
industrious as a beehive.  Gradually, however, the beauty of the
scene—summer dying like a lovely woman whose mortal disease only
enhances loveliness—stole in upon her and won her for the moment.  She
looked at the wonderful colors far and near, she drank in the last
potent draughts of summer’s perfume.  And suddenly she thought, "I would
be divorcing all this, too!"  These gardens that she had created; the
house that she had made over.  Why, these things were part of her very
soul. The same life throbbed in them that throbbed in her boy and in
herself—her own life blood!  The place was in Richard Vaughan’s name
just as she herself was, just as Winchie was.  But it was not his;
it—all that made it individual—was hers!

Most of us pass through the world, leaving little more trace of our
individuality than a traveler leaves in a hotel room.  But Courtney had
the creative instinct powerfully developed.  She even never dressed in
exactly the same way, no matter how simple her costume or how often she
wore it; and her clothes were so individual that Richard the absent
spoke of hats and dresses she had worn several years back.  And this
place—it was like the picture the artist keeps by him and touches and
retouches.  Also, she now realized for the first time how profoundly
domestic she was by nature.  Not by chance had she avoided the life of
the gadabout and meddler which is chosen by so many women when they find
themselves mismated, and so, without hope of the normal life.  She had
always classed herself with the flyabout sort of women rather than with
the domestic sort; she had fallen into the common error of taking as
representative of the domestic type those dreary rotters who sit at home
inert and slovenly simply because it requires less effort to stay at
home than to dress and issue forth.  Now she saw that she was domestic,
was a home-maker and a home-lover; and she understood a deeper depth of
her unhappiness—the unhappiness that comes from being cheated out of
one’s dearest desires; for how incomplete must be any home without love
of husband and wife.  And she understood why, as she made her
surroundings more and more like her dreams, her longing for love had
grown apace; she was like the bird that builds its nest, and has nothing
to put in it.

She had built this nest; now she must abandon it. Heavier and heavier
grew her heart, as she thought of the years of thought and toil she had
invested, as she looked about at the results.  She rebuked herself
almost fiercely—in terror of the weakness to which these lamentings
might tempt her; in shame at the disloyalty to Basil.  "I’m utterly
selfish," she said to herself.  "I’m shrinking from making any sacrifice
at all."  There she stopped short in a kind of terror.  "Sacrifice"—what
a strange word to use—what an ominous word—and how clearly it warned her
that delay was eating out courage, was strengthening her natural woman’s
inertia.  Sacrifice!  She began to picture what the new life would
be—perfect sympathy, companionship ever closer and closer, how she would
grow and expand, how Winchie would thrive in an atmosphere of ideal
love—and Basil and she would together create a place, a home which would
be incomparably lovelier than this....  "Yes, I must establish my life
on its permanent basis."  Her life must be straightened out, must be
settled right.  Until it was based right, nothing could be right; mind
and heart would always be uneasy, and from time to time in a turmoil.
"Nothing is settled," her father often used to quote, "until it’s
settled right."  He was thinking of large affairs, but the thing was
just as true of the affairs of private life.  Her and Richard’s
relations, her and Basil’s relations, and therefore her and Winchie’s
relations, were awry, all awry.  There had been successive adjustments;
they had one after the other fallen to pieces—because "nothing is
settled until it’s settled right."

That very evening, it so happened, for the first time Richard made a
remark that gave her an opening.  "Why don’t you stay down in the
evenings?" said he.  "It doesn’t disturb me for you to play and sing in
the sitting room when I’m in the library."

"The last few times I did it," replied she, "you slipped away to the
shop."

He reddened, laughed guiltily.  "Did I?  Well—perhaps in certain
moods——"

"Oh, I’m not complaining," she assured him.  "I’ve got used to our
leading separate lives—long ago....  I like it as much as you do."

"Separate lives," said he reflectively.  "It’s true, we don’t see much
of each other.  Husbands and wives rarely do, when the man amounts to
anything, or is trying to amount to anything."

"Unless they work together."

"And that’s impossible where people are of our station."

Our station!  Her lip curled and her heart protested. How could a human
being with a human heart talk of a station too high for love—love that
was the soul of life.

"Also," continued he, reflective and absent, "it’s out of the question
where the husband is pursuing an intellectual occupation."  Even had he
not been merely thinking aloud, it would not have occurred to him that
there was any slur in a statement of an elementary axiom as to the
different spheres of the two sexes.  "And," he went on, "it’s
unnecessary to married happiness, as we’ve proved. You had an idea
once—do you remember?—"

"Yes—I remember."

"If I’d let you have your foolish, impulsive, romantic way, and you’d
been at my elbow down at the shop, where I get irritable and cranky—we’d
not have made our present record—would we?"

She shivered.  "No," she said faintly.

"Five years with hardly a misunderstanding, and not one quarrel."

His words, his manner—complacent, content—calmly possessive—dried up her
courage and her hope.  But she held to her purpose.  She said, "We’re
not interested enough in each other to quarrel."

He laughed, assuming she was jesting.  "That’s it! That’s exactly it."

"I was speaking seriously.  It’s the truth.  We care nothing about each
other."

"Courtney!" he admonished.  "Aren’t you carrying the joke too far?  I
don’t think you realize how that sounds."

"I realize how it _is_."

He looked at her curiously.  "Why, I thought you were joking."

"Not in the least."

"How pale your face is.  And what a strange expression round the
mouth—and your eyes are circled.  Are you ill, dear?"

"Absolutely well.  It’s the strain of getting ready to say these things
to you."  She saw he was observing her like a physician studying a
patient.  "No, I’m not insane, either," said she good-humoredly.

"What’s happened to upset you?"

She put one knee in a chair, leaned toward him over its back, her elbows
upon it.  Said she, "It isn’t a matter of to-day, but of five years—or,
rather, of four years."

He straightened up in his chair.  She imagined that his grandfather, old
Colonel Achilles, must have looked like that at the same age.  "What
_are_ you talking about?" he demanded.

"About our failure as a married couple," replied she, meeting his gaze
with calm courage.

"Failure!" exclaimed he.  "Why, our married life is ideal.  I wouldn’t
have it changed in the least particular."  He nodded his handsome,
powerful head.  "Not in the least particular."

She had expected him to say something like this.  But the actual words,
spoken with sincerity and conviction, stopped her.  Her road had ended
against the face of a cliff with a precipice on either side.

"I want to be free," she said desperately.  "I must be free!"

"Free?  You _are_ free."

"I mean free from marriage," explained she gently, "free to make my own
life."

He reflected, looked at her, reflected again.  She saw, as plainly as if
his thoughts were print before her eyes, that he had decided she was a
spoiled child in a pet, that he was trying to find some kindly,
effective way of humoring her. But to take her words seriously, to meet
her on a plane of equality—the idea had not occurred to the grandson of
Achilles Vaughan, and could not occur to him.  Anger boiled up in her,
evaporated.  She laughed.

He glanced at her quickly.  "Oh, you were joking!" said he in a relieved
tone.

"That wasn’t why I laughed.  It was to save myself from doing something
ridiculous—shouting out, or upsetting the table, or running amuck."

"No matter.  It’s clear to me that you’re not yourself this evening—not
at all."

"Richard," said she slowly, "I know it’s hard for you to believe a
woman’s not a fool.  I don’t expect you to credit me with intelligence.
Perhaps you might if I were a big, fat woman with a loud voice.  But I’m
not.  So, assume I’m as silly a fool as—as most women pretend to be, to
catch husbands and to use them after they’re caught. But please assume
also that, whatever I am or am not, I want my freedom.  And try to
realize that we women are living in the twentieth century as well as you
men—and not in the tenth or fifteenth."

His expression was serious and respectful; he was not one to fail in
polite consideration for the feminine—the wayward, capricious,
irrational feminine with which stronger and rational man should ever be
patient and gentle.  But she saw that he was in reality about as much
impressed as he would have been by a demand for the open cage door from
a canary born and bred to captivity and helplessness. He came round the
table, put his hands tenderly on her shoulders, pressed his lips in a
husbandly caress upon the coil of auburn hair that crowned her small
head.  "You’re tired and nervous to-night, dear," said he with grave
kindness.  "So we’ll not talk about it any more.  Go to bed, and get a
good night’s sleep.  Then——"

She rose, found herself at a disadvantage standing before one so much
taller, sat down in another chair.  "Yes, I am tired and I am nervous.
But I’m also in earnest. Why, if we weren’t strangers, you’d realize.
You’d have felt it long ago.  Can’t you see I’m nothing to you or you to
me that is, nothing especial—nothing that ought to satisfy either of
us?"  She was trying to speak with serious calmness; the very effort
overstrained her.  And his face—its expression was so hopeless!  She was
speaking a language he did not understand, was speaking of matters of
which he had not the faintest glimmer of knowledge.  Her voice broke;
she steadied it.  It broke again.  She began to sob.  "This life of ours
is a degradation.  It’s like a stagnant pool—it’s death in life.  I
can’t stand it.  I want love—want to give love and get it!  My whole
being cries out for love!  I’m dying here of the empty heart.  I must
go.  I ask you to be just—to give me my right—my freedom——"

It was his expression that stopped her.  He was not listening to her
words at all.  He was simply waiting for her to talk out her hysteria,
as he thought it, so that he could begin to soothe the agitated child.
She threw out her arms in despair.

"Go on, dear," he urged.  "Say all you want.  You’ll feel better for
it."

The cliff, with choice between turning back and leaping over one of the
precipices on either side—the precipice of flight to Basil in secrecy
and dishonor, with Winchie, or the precipice of a divorce with Winchie
taken away from her.  She buried her face in her arms and burst into
wild sobs.  With Winchie taken away from her!  If she fled, he would
follow, would take Winchie.  If she divorced him, he would take Winchie.
It was hopeless—hopeless.  There was no escape.  Sobbing, she ran round
and round her prison’s outer court to which she had penetrated.  It had
no gates—none!  He waited until she was quiet, except that her shoulders
heaved occasionally.  "Poor dear!" he said tenderly.  "Poor child!"  And
he took her in his arms. She felt physically and morally too weak for
the least struggle.  She lay passive against his breast, her heartache
throbbing dully.  He carried her upstairs, laid her gently on the sofa
at the foot of her bed.  "Now you feel better, don’t you?" said he,
bending over her and smiling sympathetically down.

She gazed at him with forlorn, hopeless eyes, then rested her head
weakly against the cushions in the corner of the sofa.

"Of course, I understood that what you were saying a while ago was only
a nervous mood.  But it gave me a shock, too.  I know now what was the
matter."

She grew cold, rigid.  Did he suspect?  Would he take Winchie?

"I admit I’ve been neglecting you lately.  Gallatin’s leaving put a lot
of work on me.  And, too, I read an article that gave me a silly
scare—made me afraid I’d be anticipated in one of my discoveries if I
didn’t push things.  But even if I was negligent, I can’t see how you
could get the notion in your head that you weren’t loved any more."  He
sat down by her on the sofa, kissed the nape of her neck. "I’ll make up
for it," he murmured.  "Why, it’d be as impossible for me to stop loving
you as for you, a good woman, to stop loving your husband.  The idea of
_you_ talking divorce!"  He laughed boyishly.  "You and I—divorced! What
a naughty child it was!  It seems dreadful that those pure lips could be
sullied by such a word.  But it never was in your heart.  A woman like
you, a woman I trust my honor to, and trust my boy to, couldn’t think
such things."

His words and manner, all tenderness, were for her reminders of the
Vaughan prejudice and the Vaughan will and the Vaughan pride that lay
behind; the clang of iron doors, the grate of brass keys in steel locks.
She, back in her cell and prostrate on its floor, felt she must indeed
have been driven out of her senses by heart hunger to imagine she could
get freedom and Winchie from Richard Vaughan. How love and hope had
tricked her!

"Asleep, dear?"

"No."

"You don’t doubt my love any longer, do you?"

She moved restlessly.

"Still cross?"  He took her in his arms in spite of her struggles, began
to caress her.  And she who had never resisted did not know how to
resist now—did not dare to resist, so cowed was she by fear of losing
Winchie, so utterly was she despising herself—"nothing but a woman."
She endured till reaction stung her into crying out in anguish: "For
God’s sake, Richard!  I am so miserable!"

"I’m sorry," he said contritely.  "I thought you wanted it."  He rose at
once.  "Would you like to be left alone?"

"Please."

"You forgive me for neglecting you?

"Anything!" she cried.  "Only go.  If you don’t, I shall—"  She pressed
her lips together tightly and drew all her nerves and muscles tense to
keep back the avowal that was fighting for exit.

"I’ll give up my work until you feel better."

"No—no.  I don’t want—  Go—please go!  For Winchie’s sake—for mine—for
your own."

He did not attach enough importance to her words to note them and
inquire.  When the door closed behind him, she drew a long breath—not so
much relief that she was alone, as relief that, before seeing how
useless it was to try to escape, she had not burst out with the whole
truth.  A turn of the wind of emotion before he spoke of Winchie, and
she would have told all!  Even after he had reminded her—yes, even until
the door closed between them, she might still have been goaded by her
despair or by his manner into precipitating the cataclysm——

"For he’d never have let me see Winchie again!"  And—what else would he
have done?—what would he not have done?  She put out her lights and,
without drawing aside the portière, softly opened Winchie’s door and
entered. She dropped down by his bed, slipped her hand under the cover,
delicately warm from his healthy young body.  Her fingers rested upon
his breast over his heart.  That calm, regular throb of young life beat
upon her spirit like the soft, insistent rain that soothes the
storm-racked sea.

Winchie!  If she had lost him!  If she had brought disgrace upon him!
She drew her hand away lest its trembling should waken him.  The room
was pitch dark, but she could see him lying there, his tumbled fair hair
against the white pillow, his round cheeks flushed with healthy sleep.
She sat on the floor beside the bed, listening to his breathing.  She
had gone down to the gates of the world and had led him through them
into life.  Claim upon him she had none—for he owed her nothing, and if
his lot were not happy he would have the right to blame her.  No, he
owed her nothing; but his claim upon her was for the last moment of her
time, for the last thought of her brain, for the last drop of her blood.

"If it were not for Winchie," she said to herself, "I’d go to Basil.
I’d leave here to-night.  I owe nothing to Dick.  While his way of
looking at life is not his fault, neither is it mine.  And as it’s his
way, not mine, he should suffer for it, not I.  But for Winchie I must
stay—and live and make this house a home."

Never again would there be the least danger of her being goaded into
telling Richard and defying and compelling him.  No delirium, not even a
fever like a maniac loose in the brain and hurling all its tenant
thoughts helter-skelter through the lips, could dislodge that secret.
It was sealed with the great seal of a mother’s love.


When she came down to breakfast, Dick was at one of the long windows,
back to the room, hands deep in trousers’ pockets.  At her "Good
morning," he turned quickly. Before he answered, he noted her
expression, and his face brightened.  He kissed the cheek she turned for
him as usual, and they seated themselves.  In came Mazie with the
coffee; it had the delicious fragrance that proclaims fine coffee well
made, the fragrance that will put the grouchiest riser into an amiable
frame of mind.  Then she brought the spoon bread and an omelette—not the
heavy, solid, yellow-brown substantiality that passes for omelette with
the general, but a light and airy, delicately colored thing of beauty
such as a skilled cook can beat up from eggs the hens have laid within
the hour.

"Feeling all right this morning?" asked Dick when Mazie had gone out.

"Perfectly," replied Courtney, her smiling eyes like the dark green of
moss round where the spring bubbles up. She was rearranging the flowers
in the bowl.

"Sleep well?"

She had not slept at all.  She evaded his question by saying: "I was
very much upset last night, wasn’t I?"

Dick made a gesture of generous dismissal.  "Oh, I knew it was only a
passing mood," said he, helping himself liberally to the omelette.
"Everybody has moods.  Do give me some of that coffee."

Strange indeed was the expression of that small, quiet face.  What a
chaos a few blundering words from her a few hours ago would have put in
place of this domestic content of his!  "I want to say one thing more,"
said she, "and then we’ll never speak of last night—or what led up to
it."

"Yes, dear?"

"We talked a lot about ourselves—and I was thinking altogether of
myself, I find.  But the truth is, Winchie’s the only important fact in
our lives.  We don’t belong to ourselves.  We belong to him."

"That’s not exactly the way I’d put it," said he hesitatingly. "Do try
this spoon bread.  Mazie’s a wonder at making it.  Do try it."

"Not just now," said she.  "No, I know you wouldn’t put it that way.
Put it any way you like.  But it must be Winchie first, last, and all
the time.  We must see to it that he has the right sort of example—from
you—from me—from us both."

Dick nodded approvingly, and when his mouth was said: "There’s no
disputing that.  Where is he, by the way?"

"He’ll be down in a minute," replied Courtney; then went on unruffled:
"If you and I had had love before our eyes in our homes when we were
children——"

"But I did.  And I’m sure your father and mother were an equally fine
example——"

"No matter," interrupted Courtney.  Then she said, in a tone that
revealed for the first time how profoundly moved she was: "The point is
I want you to help me make a home—of love for Winchie."

"By all means!" exclaimed Dick heartily.

He stirred his coffee thoughtfully, looked at her with puzzled eyes; and
she saw that his keen, analytic mind, usually reserved wholly for his
work, was curiously inspecting her words and her manner for the meaning
that must be beneath so much earnestness about a passing anger over a
few days of neglect.  She said no more—and was glad when Winchie came
rushing in to turn the current of his thoughts.  As he was leaving for
the shop, he hunted her out in the library to kiss her good-by—a thing
he had not done in several years.

She colored, made an effort, kissed him.

"I’m sorry for my negligence since Basil left me in the lurch," said he
cheerfully.  "And you’re sorry you flew into such a fury about it.  And
it’s all settled—and forgotten?"

"We—make a fresh start," replied she.

"I’ll come and take a walk with you before dinner."

"No—no.  Please don’t.  You mustn’t change abruptly."  She stopped,
confused to find herself already shrinking from the new course she had
so highly resolved.  "Yes—do come," said she.

"Oh—I forgot.  There’s one thing I simply must attend to to-day."

"Then—to-morrow."

"Yes—to-morrow we’ll make the start—the fresh start."

"Very well," said she, relieved—for she felt she had done her duty.

Instead of going out immediately for a walk with Winchie, as was the
habit, she lingered about the house, keeping herself busily occupied.
She must write Basil. What she said must be final, for she owed him the
truth. And she must not say much; a long letter would give him hope, no
matter what words she used, and would harrow him in the reading and her
in the writing.  At last she put on hat and even gloves for the walk,
sat hastily down at her desk, wrote: "I cannot.  I belong to my boy, not
to myself."  She wished to add, "I shall try to forget.  So must you,
for my sake—" and also some word of love.  But with the two sentence she
halted her pen.  She read what she had written—"I cannot.  I belong to
my boy—not to myself."  She folded the sheet, sealed it in an envelope,
addressed it.  As she reached for the stamp she called Winchie.  They
went out together, and she mailed the letter in the box at the edge of
town.  Well, it was settled—once more.  Was this final?  "Nothing is
settled until it’s settled right."  And she said to herself that this
settlement was undoubtedly right—that is, as nearly right as anything
ever is.  Yes, it was settled—but her father’s uncompromising axiom
continued to reiterate its clear-cut, unqualified assertion.

"Why did you sigh, mamma?" asked the boy.

"Did I sigh?" said she, trying to smile as she looked down at him.

"Yes—and you haven’t been listening as we came along. You didn’t hear
what I said about the dead whip-poor-will I found on the lawn—did you?"

"No," she confessed.  "But I’ll listen now."

She found herself wondering at her calmness.  "Perhaps," reflected she,
"my fright about Winchie conquered my love.  And how deep the roots of
my life are sunk into the soil of this place!  Still—I don’t understand
it.  It doesn’t seem natural I should be calm."  There flashed before
her mind a picture—herself flying disheveled—coming forward with
laughter and jest—and lie—with the sting of forbidden kisses still upon
her face—the thrill of forbidden caresses—  And she flushed crimson as
the autumnal maples above her head, and glanced guiltily down at
Winchie—and saw that he was trying to pretend not to see.




                                  *XV*


Long before Dick got caught up with the particular piece of work that
postponed their "fresh start," Courtney’s "queer mood" and his own
resolution were shelved in one of those back closets of his memory where
reposed in darkness and dust matters relating to his family.  He forgot
nothing; his was not the forgetting kind of mind. Everything was stored
away somewhere, under its proper heading, ready for him if he should
happen to need it.  But for that especial matter there came no demand.
His happy married life had resumed its unrippled course.  He worked,
with allowance for exercise—usually a long walk or a row on the lake in
the very early morning, before breakfast. Courtney occupied herself with
house and garden.  She was building a vegetable greenhouse with a small
legacy from an aunt; also, there was the household routine of a
multitude of time-filling, thought-filling, not to be neglected details
for keeping things smooth and orderly—and there were reading and
painting and music—and there were callers and visits.  She even began to
be philosophical about the almost daily evidences that her husband
regarded her as an inferior.  All men felt that way toward women.  The
very men who never made a move without consulting their wives thought
themselves superior intelligences, and their wives mere possessors of a
crafty instinct, in common with the lower animals, an instinct that was
worth availing themselves of, as long as it was right there in the
house.  No, she was a silly supersensitive, she told herself, to be
disturbed by such a ridiculous universal masculine weakness of vanity.
As husbands went, Richard was about as good as any—better than most.

The evenings they spent together.  A charming picture of family life
they made each evening during that rare, exquisite September.  The big
log fire in the sitting room; he at the desk, she reading or sewing, or,
less frequently, playing and singing softly.  She had never been
lovelier. The slightly haggard look was becoming to her young face, and
the weariness of the eyelids also, and the pathos of her mouth so eager
to smile, and the milky emerald of the eyes, like seas troubled so deep
down that the surface was only clouded, but not ruffled.  Sometimes she
let Winchie stay with them an hour or so.  Then the picture was
complete—the boy playing on the floor before the fire, making what he
called drawings at the table, always between his father and his mother,
always nearer his mother, near enough to put out his hand and touch her
and make quite sure of the reality of her lovely presence.  Yes, she
assured herself many times each day, the struggle was over; the pain
would grow less and less, would pass—for the question of her life
relations was settled—"and settled right."

This until mid-October, when the bleak rains inaugurated what promised
to be a worse than the previous winter. On the fourth successive day
indoors, as she sat at a drawing table in the upstairs sitting room, she
suddenly lifted her head, thrust back the table, flung down the pencil,
and rushed to the window.  The lawns were flooded.  Bushes and trees
were drearily fluttering the last wet faded tatters of autumnal finery.
Decay—desolation—death—  "Will he never come!  Will he never write!"
And the secret of her calm, so carefully guarded from herself, was a
secret from her no longer.

It had been a farce—the six weeks of resignation.  One of
self-deception’s familiar farces; those farces that finally make old
people cynical in spite of themselves about the reality of disinterested
goodness, of self-sacrifice, of anything except selfishness.  A
farce—nothing more.  That was why she could write a brief farewell and
send it off with merely a pang and a sigh.  And ever since she had been
confidently waiting for something to happen. Something?  What but his
coming—coming to give her again the love that was life and light to her,
the love she could no more refuse than a drowning man can withhold his
hand from clutching the rope though the devil himself toss it.  And once
more her father’s maxim, "Nothing is settled until it’s settled right,"
began to thrust itself at her—mockingly now, as if deriding her
self-deceiving attempts to found her life upon conditions to which mind
and conscience had agreed, but not heart.  And heart, the most powerful
of the trinity that must harmonize within a human being or there is no
peace—heart had suddenly torn up the treaty of peace and declared war.
And war there was.

About seven that evening Dick knocked at her bedroom door.  "May I
come?" he called.

"Yes—if you won’t stay long," was her reply in a listless tone.

He entered, looked surprised when he saw her propped up in bed with her
supper tray in her lap.  "Are you ill?"

"No."

"You didn’t come down to supper."

"No."

"I don’t think I ever knew you to do this before."

"No."

"Your voice sounds—strange—tired."

"I am."

"You don’t exercise enough, I guess.  And there’s little for you to do
about the house—with Lizzie looking after the flowers and Nanny such a
good housekeeper and Mazie such a splendid cook.  We’re getting the
benefit of my aunt’s toil.  She built up such a splendid system that it
runs itself—and there’s really not enough for you to do. You ought to——"

"Won’t you take this tray—take it down with you?"

"Don’t you want me to sit a while?"

"Don’t let me interfere with your work."

"Oh, there’s no hurry."

"I’m sure you want to be at it."

He took the tray from her lap, put it on the floor beside his chair.
She reached for the book on the stand at her elbow, opened it, seemed to
be waiting for him to go.  He glanced round uncertainly.  "What a
charming room this is," said he.  "That pale brown paper with the panels
made by broad violet stripes—  Let me see—was this one of the rooms you
did over?"

She was reading.

"Yes of course.  In my aunt’s time—  You’d have admired her, and she’d
have been invaluable as a teacher. But then she taught Nanny; and
Nanny’s been very good about teaching you, hasn’t she?"

No answer.

He laughed.  "We’ve got a rather bad habit of not listening—haven’t we?"

"Oh—I don’t mind."

He glanced at the tray.  "Why, you didn’t eat anything!"

"No."

"Are you quite sure you’re not ill?"

"Quite."

"Well, if there’s anything I can——"

"Nothing, thanks."

He went to the bed, bent over and kissed her.  "Good night."

"Good night."  She was reading again; and his thoughts returned to his
work as he closed her bedroom door behind him.  If he had looked in on
her an hour later, he might have seen that she had not yet turned the
page she pretended to begin, to get rid of him—or, rather, to help him
go where he really wished to be.  And he would have distrusted her
assurance that she was not ill.  For her eyes, wide and circled and
wretched, were staring into space.  She was indeed ill—ill of
loneliness, of heart-emptiness, of that hope deferred which maketh the
heart sick. And the rain streamed on and on.  The sight of it by day
filled her with the despair that lowers and rages.  The sound of it
monotonously pattering upon the balcony at night changed her despair
from active to passive, from vain revolt to lying inert in the wash of
inky waves under inky sky.

The sympathy between her and Winchie was so close that they were like
one rather than like two.  He had early discovered her sensitiveness to
the weather, but never before had he seen her frankly downhearted.  He
did not annoy her.  He watched her furtively, his little heart aching.
He spent most of his time near the west windows of the upstairs sitting
room.  From them, now that the trees were almost bare, he could see part
of the Donaldson’s roof—the part topped by a weather vane.  He knew that
so long as the vane pointed east the rains would pour down, and his
mother’s low spirits would continue—that when it should veer to the west
the rain would cease and the sky clear.

Day after day he watched, his hopes rising as the vane veered now toward
the north, now toward the south, and falling again as, with a jerk, it
flirted back into the eye of the east.  That vane was the last thing he
saw as the darkness closed down in the late afternoon; it was the first
thing he looked at in the morning, dashing to the window the instant he
awakened.  The change came in the night, when it finally did come.  As
he awakened, the difference in the light, in the feel of the air told
him that all was well once more.  But he made sure; he hurried to one of
his windows, turned the slats of a blind, looked at the vane.  Then,
with a shout, he darted to her door, beat upon it, crying: "Mamma!
Mamma Courtney!  The wind’s west—the wind’s west!"

She understood, opened the door.  She had made her face bright.  "Thank
you—thank you," she said, with a catch in her voice, as she knelt and
took him in her arms. He put one of his small hands on each of her
cheeks, kissed her, then looked into her eyes.  His face fell.  She
could not deceive him; it had not been the rain.

The wind was in the west; her mood veered—but to another futility.  She
watched for the postman.  She startled and ran to the window at every
crunch of wheels on the drive.  She was agitated whenever the telephone
bell rang. At night every suggestion of sound from the direction of the
window made her lift her head from the pillow to listen; and often she
would fly to open a shutter and lean out into the darkness.  She would
not go to Wenona, lest he should come while she was away.  She never
left the house for a walk without telling the servants just where she
was going—"and if anyone comes, send for me."

Never before had she surrendered to the somber mood; she had always met
it by taking up some one of the things at hand that interested her, and
working at it until health and youth and hope reasserted themselves.
But this time she could find nothing to build upon; it was all
quicksand, slipping away and leaving her to sink.  She no longer cared
about her surroundings.  She had always seen to it that the servants she
had so thoroughly trained in a modern system she had carefully worked
out did their duties, and did them well.  Now she let the servants do as
they pleased—and they soon pleased to do very poorly—as poorly as the
average human being does, unless held rigidly from his natural
tendencies to slovenliness and shirking.  She had always done the buying
for the kitchen, and had herself selected at the farm the things to be
sent over.  Now the good old days of Aunt Eudosia returned, with the
farmer sending whatever gave him or one of "the hands" the least
trouble, and with Nanny accepting from the storekeepers what they chose
at their own price.  The bills went up; yet the meat was often tough,
the chickens and game inferior, the butter and eggs only fair, instead
of the very best.  Canned vegetables appeared on the table when fresh
vegetables were still to be had.  The coffee was capricious.  The table
itself was carelessly set; napkins were used several times, instead of
only once; tablecloths did not always go into the wash with the first
spot.  Lizzie and Mazie lost no opportunity to cut down the amount of
work they would have to do on wash and ironing days.

In the living rooms, upstairs as well as down, there was no longer the
beautiful order that had made the interior a pleasure to the eye and so
comfortable.  A chair had only three casters; a door was losing its
knob.  A window curtain had broken away from its rod at one corner and
was hanging down.  Several cushions had rips in them that would soon be
rents.  Winchie’s ravages remained unrepaired—and unrebuked.  The
flowers in the vases were not fresh every day, and were arranged by a
servant’s heavy hands.  Window gardens and baskets and hothouse suffered
from alterations of drought and deluge, and showed it.  The red spider
was rarely interrupted in his ruinous feasts.  Where order has been
perfect, brief neglect produces unsightly disorder.  The house was
becoming like most houses—indifferently looked after by women who know
little about housekeeping as an art and feel "above" the endless petty
details that must be attended to, no matter what the enterprise, if
there is to be success.  The work of changing the library to a winter
conservatory had, like the vegetable greenhouse, been begun, and
abandoned midway.

From the house the blight spread to herself.  It is well-nigh impossible
for a person who has been bred from birth in personal order and
cleanliness to become really slovenly and dirty, unless beaten down into
the hopeless wretchedness of extreme poverty.  But Courtney had lost
interest in herself, just as she had lost interest in the house.  She
got herself together "any old way" in the mornings, took to breakfasting
in bed.  Sometimes she dressed for supper, and sometimes she came in
working or walking clothes or in the négligée she had been wearing all
day.  Sometimes her blouse was buttoned in the back, oftener it was
partly open.  Wrinkled stockings had been her especial abhorrence, as
she was proud of her slim tapering legs; now she habitually went the
whole day without garters.  She read much, and always novels.  Formerly
their pandering to "spirituality," to "culture," to all the silly and
enfeebling sentimentalisms had bored her. They had offended her sense of
what was truly ideal—for, even thus early in her development, she had a
strong suspicion that "idealism" was not a mode of life but a strut, and
that "idealists" were not above but beneath usefulness. Now she took
novels as a drug fiend his dope.  Anything to escape reality—the ugly
facts which her negligence was making uglier day by day.

She was in the way trod by so many women who, married and safe, cease to
compete and deteriorate physically, morally, and mentally.  And she knew
it.  She had too much intelligence to delude herself, as some women do.
Instead of being angered when evidence of her plight thrust at her, she
found bitter satisfaction in it.  "I’ll soon be down to the level of
those ’good’ women Dick regards as models," thought she.  And she read
on at her novels.

And still she continued to hope, though she constantly assured herself
that hope was dead and buried.  It was nearly Christmas; he had been
gone more than four months—a hundred and thirty days.  No word from him,
no sign. "It’s over," declared she.  "It was just physical attraction,
nothing more.  And he got enough."  This lash upon pride and vanity
stung.  But the pain seemed to ease another and fiercer pain, and she
scourged on.  "He got enough.  In New York he found fresh attraction—not
hard for a man with money and free."  Yes, he had used her, despising
her the while—how she writhed as she rubbed the coarse salt of these
taunts into her wounds!—had used her, despising her the while, had cast
her away, like the butt of a smoked cigarette.  "And why shouldn’t he
use and despise and drop me?  Could anyone have been ’easier’ than I
was—I, poor fool, with my dreams of love, and my loneliness and
credulity?  Well, anyhow he ought to be grateful to fate for having
given him a distraction in this dull hole." ... What vanity had been
hers, to imagine she could win and hold such a man as he—man of the
world, experienced, clever.  What colossal vanity!  "Really, I deserve
all I’ve got.  I’m just like the rest of the women—a vanity box, a
mirror and a powder puff, silly and empty—a fool for men to flatter and
wheedle and laugh at....  What a poor, dependent thing a woman is!
Dick’s right; we’re worthless except as pastimes.  Don’t we always
despise and trample on a man who takes us seriously?  We feel he has
dropped down to our level."

She dissected, one by one, the "good" women over in the town and in the
big houses along the south shore—their inane lives, their inane
pastimes, their inane conversation. What animal grossness concealed by
manners and a thin veneer of education, just as their costly clothes
concealed the truth about their neglected bodies.  What lazy ignorance
beneath those pretentious fads for "culture" or religion or charity.
And the men, too—through their passions dominated by these women.  Not
an idea—not an aspiration—just hunting and money-making and eating and
drinking—catering to crude appetites.  Slavish conformity to the
soddening, mind-suffocating routine prescribed by custom for the
comfortable classes.  Fit associates, these men and their women.  The
nauseating hypocrisies and self-cheating about virtue and piety and
"pure family life!"  A pigsty of a world, if one looked at it as it was,
instead of at its professions and pretenses.  "I’d rather be the dupe of
my own honest folly than the dupe of the world’s cheap frauds.  At
least, I aspired.  And now that I’ve fallen back into the muck, all
bruised and broken, I don’t lie to myself about its being muck.... And
what can I do for Winchie?  If I teach him what he ought to be, I’ll
unfit him for life in the world.  If I fit him for life in the world, I
must teach him to pretend, to cheat, to lie, to trample and cringe.  If
I teach him the truth about women, he’ll become a rake.  If I don’t,
he’ll become their dupe.  If I teach him the truth about men, he’ll shun
them.  If I don’t, they will debauch him."

A wound always constructs a cover, to protect itself while it is
healing.  The wounded heart of an intelligent man or woman usually
protects itself with the scab of cynicism.  For the last few years
Courtney had shared with Wenona’s few progressive, restless young
married women that reputation for thinking and saying startling things
which anyone at all free in thought and speech soon gets among
conventional people.  Now she became a mild scandal. Wenona appreciated
that it was the fashion in these degenerate days, the mark of the "upper
class," to indulge in audacities of every kind.  Also, whatever a
Benedict and a Vaughan did must be just about right.  But sometimes,
when she was in a particularly insurgent mood, her callers went away
dazed.

They wondered what her husband thought of such disbelief in everything
that men, themselves disbelieving, held it imperative for women to
believe—women and children and preachers.  The fact was he knew nothing
about it. Conversation between him and his wife was confined to the
necessary routine matters, and never extended beyond a few sentences.
They saw each other at table only; then Winchie did most of the talking,
or it grew out of and centered round things he had inquired about.
Richard and Courtney neither acted nor felt like strangers.  That would
have meant strain.  They ignored each other with the easy
unconsciousness that characterizes an intimate life in which there is no
sympathy, no common interest.  When Richard talked about his work, as he
did occasionally, merely the better to arrange his thoughts, Courtney
did not listen. When Courtney and Winchie talked together, Richard did
not listen.


"You saw the news in to-day’s paper?" said Richard at supper a few days
after Christmas.

As he continued to look expectantly at her, she roused herself from her
reverie, slowly grasped his question.  "I didn’t read to-day’s papers,"
answered she.

"Well, Gallatin’s engagement’s announced—from Philadelphia."

She nerved herself for the reaction of inward turmoil which would, she
felt, certainly follow such a blow.  To her amazement no reaction came.
She felt as calm as if the news had been about some one of whom she had
never heard.

"Why, you seem not to be interested."

"Oh, yes," replied she indifferently.

"I remember, you didn’t like him."

It almost seemed true to her.  Or, rather, that she had never cared
about him one way or the other.

"And he so mad about you," continued Richard with raillery.  "I’ll never
forget the looks he used to give you—or the ones he gave me, either.
Well, it’s all over now. He’s evidently cured."

"Evidently," said Courtney.  She looked calmly at him, shifted her gaze.
It happened to fall upon Winchie. The boy was frowning jealously into
his plate.  She colored. She never had the slightest self-consciousness
about Basil with Richard, but only with the boy.  However, the reminder
soon passed in marvel at her amazing tranquillity. How could she be thus
calm in face of such a blow?  Had she really conquered her love?  Had
this sudden, unexpected news of his perfidy killed it all in an instant?
Had she never loved him?

Richard had been talking, and she had been so absorbed she had not
heard.  Now he was holding a letter across the table toward her.
Mechanically she reached out, took it, fixed her eyes upon it.  "And
Mrs. Torrey says," Richard was explaining, "that we ought to ask Cousin
Helen here—for a few months at least—until she gets over her father’s
death."

"Wenona’s no place for a girl in search of a husband."

"A husband!" exclaimed Richard.  "Who said anything about a husband?"

"Now that her father’s dead, with nothing but a small life insurance,
she’s got to marry."

"Yes, I suppose so."

"That’s what Mrs. Torrey’s saying between these lines."  And she handed
the letter back.

"Mrs. Torrey’s a fine, noble old lady.  Such sordid ideas never’d enter
her head."

"Mrs. Torrey’s a woman."

"And a good one—and so is Helen," maintained Richard. "Marrying’s about
the last idea in her head at present."

"I believe that is the theory—among men who know nothing about women."

"She’s doubtless almost prostrated with grief."

"With anxiety, perhaps.  Not with grief.  Not for a worthless old
drunkard."

"You forget, Courtney.  He was her _father_."

Courtney lifted her eyebrows.  "So much the more certain she detested
him.  She had to live right up against him."

Richard leaned forward slightly, to add emphasis to his rebuke.  "I
repeat, Helen is a good woman—a woman with a sense of duty.  She must
have loved him."

"Why repeat such twaddle?" inquired Courtney, unimpressed. "What has
duty to do with hearts?"

Dick looked strong disapproval.  "What is the matter, my dear?  You’re
not talking in the least like yourself."

"You always make that same remark," observed Courtney, "whenever I say
anything that does not suit you."

"Are you irritated by the prospect of Helen’s coming? If you don’t want
her——"

"I am not irritated about anything.  As for Helen, I care not a rap one
way or the other."

Winchie had finished.  He kissed his father, then his mother good night,
and went upstairs.  Richard came out of a deep study to say, "It’s a
pity Gallatin isn’t free and here—if Helen comes."

"It would have made a good match," said Courtney judiciously.  "A
splendid living for Helen."

"I wasn’t thinking of Gallatin’s wealth," protested Richard, reddening.
Then he laughed, "At least, not altogether."

"The living’s the main point in marriage."

"What an unpleasant mood you’re in."

"I?  I never felt more amiable."

"Have I said anything to offend you?"

"Not a thing."  She rose languidly.  "You’re still the model—not a
single redeeming fault."

She stretched herself with slow, lazy grace.  "But you," said he, "are a
bundle of redeeming faults and vagaries—a bouquet of them."  And he was
about to kiss her.

She flung away from him with flashing eyes.  He stared, amazed.  "How
you startled me!" she exclaimed, quickly changing her expression from
fury to half-laughing irritation.

"Miss Caprice!"  And his gaze was soft and brilliant.

There was a virgin coldness in her manner that puzzled and abashed him.
"How I hate this body of mine, sometimes!" said she.  "An admiring look
makes me angry, and a kiss seems an insult.  Come to me with your love
when I’m old and ugly.  Then, perhaps, I’ll believe it."

And she strolled out of the room and upstairs.  The instant she had her
bedroom door locked, she knew why she had come away—knew she had been
obeying an instinct warning her secret self that she could not many
minutes longer endure the strain.  "But really I am calm," she insisted.
In the same second her wound opened and was aching and bleeding and
throbbing, unhealed.  "I can never forget—never!" she cried.  "Was it
only this body of mine he cared for?  What does it matter?  Even the
little he gave was more than I had to give.  I ought to have been more
humble about giving—I who had so little.  And what happiness he gave me
in exchange! No—not happiness, but more than happiness."  Her eyes
strained into the night.  It was so dreary—so lonely. "Basil!—Basil!
I’m dying for you—dying from the core out!"

She flung her windows wide.  The snow came whirling in.  The wind was
moaning among the branches.  Somewhere, far away, a bell tolled.
Silence, utter solitude, a stretch of white snow under a black sky, and
the chilling cold.  "Come to me!" she cried.  "I am so cold—so lonely—so
hungry!  And I love you."

Even where a woman cannot doubt that her lover has forgotten, there are
times when memory—of his vows so convincing, of his caresses that seemed
the inspiration of her charms alone—makes her defy certainty and
believe. And Courtney had no real reason to think him either false or
forgetful.  They had been torn apart when their love was still hungry
and thirsty, when even the long calm that precedes satiety was still far
in the future, when they were so absorbed in loving that they had not
yet had time to begin to get acquainted with each other’s real self.  It
was doubt of him that was forced, belief in him that was natural.  "If
he were not so strong, so honorable!" she cried. "Ah, if he were only
where I could tempt him!"


Even the thought of Winchie now lost all power to check her; he was too
much like part of herself.  She seemed as placid in her slender
youthfulness as those handsome matronly women who suggest extinct
volcanoes covered with flowers and smiling fields.  Beneath her manner
of monotonous, emotionless calm she was battling with the temptation to
take her boy and fly from that cold desolation of loveless loneliness,
to fly to him.  If Richard had not been absolutely apart from her life,
absolutely out of her thoughts she would have hated him.  As it was her
rage fretted at the impersonal barriers and bonds that held her—not
Richard, but conventionality and, above all, lack of money.  "If only I
had money!" she cried again and again.

But she had nothing—her clothes, a few dollars that must be paid out for
expenses already incurred.  "If I went to him, it would be to become his
dependent, just as I am Richard’s.  Oh, the horror of being a woman!
Bred to dependence; bred for the market; bred to tease some man into
undertaking her support for life.  There is the rotten spot in my whole
life.  If Richard had ever deigned to speculate as to what was going on
in my head, he’d never have dared touch me.  He’d have feared I was his
only for hire.  But would he care?  Doesn’t he expect me to be true
because he supports me?  Isn’t that what marriage means, beneath the
cant and pretense?  Yes, I’m simply part of his property, and the
pretenses that gloze it over only make it the more revolting.  Oh, if
men had sensibilities, and if they knew what women thought!—why we smile
and flatter and stay on, in spite of neglect and insult!"

She felt that, if she should go to Basil, the day would come when their
love would die of this poison exuding from the basic fact of their
relations—his sense of his rights because of her dependence; or, her
fear of losing or impairing her living; or, her feeling that since she
took bread she must give body—all she had to pay with.  Richard thought
he could afford to be neglectful; and when it suited him to give passing
attention to his property again—to walk in his garden and eat a little
fruit from his tree—he thought he had a perfect right to do so.  If
Richard was thus, if all men believed thus, why fancy Basil an
exception?  Basil, in time, when passion cooled, would hold her in the
same light disesteem.  If a man lost his virtue, even hypocrisy did not
go beyond a half smiling shake of the head; if a woman lost her virtue,
she was "ruined."  Ruined—that is, a worthless wreck.  "No, I shall not
go to Basil.  No doubt, he still cares—in a man’s way of caring.  But he
holds me, the unfaithful wife, cheap enough. If I were to lose
reputation also, were to be unable to give him the pleasure of
trespassing on another’s property, were to be merely a ruined woman,
living off him, he’d soon treat me like the slave that I am.  No, I’ll
not change owners.... If only I had money!"

What, then?  She had seen all along that she was like one sinking in the
ooze of a marsh—softly, inevitably toward suffocation.  "If I stay on
here, I’ll become like the rest of the settled, disillusioned married
women.  I’ll become a chronic sloven and—as my disposition isn’t toward
fat, squatted good nature—a shrew.  A slovenly shrew!"  Why not?  What
had she left to live for?  In a few years Winchie would be away at
school—then in some city at profession or business—and married and out
of her life.  "I might as well give up.  Why not?"

There seemed to be no reason.  But our conduct in its main lines is not
governed by reason, but by instincts that impel us even against will.
When Richard had failed her at the outset of their married life, she had
sunk; then her temperament of hope and energy had forced her up again in
face of deepest discouragements.  So now, while there was no reason why
she should cease to sink, should begin to struggle, while Basil’s
announced engagement assuring a speedy marriage seemed just the thing to
make her sink on, she began to rouse herself and to look about her.  For
the second time her longings and energies had lost their stimulus, their
inspiration, their vitalizing center.  And that center is to an
unselfish nature as necessary as queen bee to swarm which clusters about
her, labors for her, and renews through her.  With human beings such as
Courtney Vaughan longings and energies rarely die upon the corpse of
their inspiration.  After a while they fly upward, as did hers, and
begin to circle in search of a new clustering center, a new reason for
living and working on.  "I can’t stay here," she kept repeating.  "I
must go somewhere.  I must do something.  Where?  What?"  How settle her
life problem so that it would be "settled right," and she could have
peace and happiness?  She found no answer.  But she kept on thrusting
the question at herself.  It was as significant of her character as of
her trend of thought that her cry "If only I had money!" changed to "If
only I could _make_ money!"




                                 *XVI*


They were at supper, Dick reading the paper, Winchie busy with bowl of
rice and milk, Courtney listening to the storm that shrieked in baffled
rage after each vain assault upon the house.  Her whole being was
quivering with the pain that never pierced her more acutely than when
she was in the presence of Basil’s vacant place at the table. Winchie,
without looking up, broke the silence: "We shan’t go, mamma, shall we,
unless it clears up?"

Dick, turning the paper, happened to hear.  "Go where?" he asked.

"To grandfather’s."

"When?"

Courtney said: "Winchie and I are going to-morrow."

"Impossible," said Dick.  "They’d think you were crazy."

"Perhaps I am," Courtney replied.  "Anyhow, we’re going."

"Why?"

"I need a change."

"Put it off till spring."  And he resumed the newspaper as if the matter
were disposed of.

"No.  To-morrow," said she, not in the least aggressively; but her tone
was of unalterable determination.

"Or, if you must go somewhere, why not Saint X?  You can visit Pauline
Scarborough or the Hargraves—and bring Helen March back with you."

"I prefer the farm."

He laid the paper down.  "You’re not serious?"

"Quite."

"Now, my dear—" he began.  His tone was one he had unconsciously adopted
from his grandfather.  He used it whenever he, as head of the family,
confronted an "irrational, feminine caprice."

"What’s the use of reasoning with me?" interrupted she.  "Didn’t your
grandfather teach you that women can’t reason?"

"I’m willing for you to go to Saint X.  But——"

She looked significantly toward Winchie.  Dick took the hint, went back
to his reading until they were alone.  Then he resumed: "I’m sure you’ll
not persist now that I’ve pointed out to you——"

"If you wish me to keep my temper," interrupted she, "you’ll not use
that wheedling tone.  I’d feel I was degrading Winchie by speaking to
him in a way that belittled his intelligence."

Dick looked astonished.  "I had no intention——"

"I know—I know," said she appealingly.  "It doesn’t matter.  I really
don’t care anything about it.

"But you’ll not go when it’s so clearly a folly to——"

"I am going," said she.  "You ought to be grateful that I have such
inexpensive whims.  Most of us silly women—"  She paused, with a lift of
the long, slender eyebrows.  How absurd to gird at him whose opinions
interested her as little as hers interested him!

He revolved what she had been saying, presently reddened. "I thought I
had explained to you," said he, "that the laboratory is very expensive.
I know I don’t give you much.  I’ve had to cut down the household
allowance because I feel sure Gallatin will be withdrawing his capital.
But just as soon as I——"

She was even of temper again.  "You remind me of old Hendricks,"
interrupted she pleasantly.  "You know, he made three people toil for
him all their lives, with no pay and mighty poor board and clothes—on
the promise of a legacy—and they died before he did."

But Dick was offended.  "It seems to me," said he, "in view of what I’m
doing at the shop——"

"Please don’t," she cried.  "You’re trying to make me out an ingrate,
who doesn’t appreciate how you’re toiling just for wife and child.  Now,
what’s the fact?  Isn’t your work your amusement?"

"Of course, I like it, but——"

"Weren’t you doing the same thing before you had a family?  Wouldn’t you
be doing it if you should lose them? Isn’t it your pride that you work
solely for love of science?"

He looked disconcerted assent.

"Then the fact is, you spend most of your income on your own amusement,
as much as if you drank it."

He reflected.  "That never occurred to me before," said he.  "Possibly I
have viewed it too one-sidedly.  I must think it over and see."

She shrugged her shoulders.  "Pray don’t, on my account."

He made no reply, put forward no further objections to her going, though
the next morning developed a driving sleet.  As she and Winchie were
about to get into the carriage he asked; "How long will you be gone?"

"Until I feel better."

"If you are ill, you must not go in this weather."

She looked at him strangely.  "If I were dying I should go," was her
slow reply.

He hesitated, studied her small, resolute face, her fever-bright eyes,
with a puzzled expression.  "I suppose it’s best to give a woman her way
in her whims, so long as they’re harmless," said he aloud, but to
himself rather than to her.  She finished wrapping up the boy, went out
to the carriage, and got in.  He lifted Winchie in, tucked them both
carefully, bade them a last good-by, his expression grave and
constrained.


In those fifteen miles through the searching cold, over roads like
fields deep plowed and frozen hard, she debated how best to carry out
her main purpose in going to that dreary farm—how to take her father
partly, perhaps wholly, into her confidence so that she might get his
help—for help she must have.  Her mother was now impossible—quite
demented on the subject of religion latterly through the long steeping
of mind and heart in a theology whose heaven was hardly less formidable
as an eternal prospect than its hell, and whose hell was a fiery sea
canopied by shriek and stench of burning multitude.  The old maid
sisters had neither experience nor judgment, only bitterness. To them it
would be inconceivable that a married woman, with a husband who
supported her in comfort, could be other than blissfully happy.  But her
father—  He had been a man of affairs, judge.  He had lived and read and
thought.  She had heard her mother rebuke him for expressing "loose"
opinions; probably he was concealing opinions even more liberal and
enlightened and humane. Perhaps he could give her practical advice—or at
least sympathy.

But, arrived at the farmhouse, she had only to look into those four
countenances to see that she was among people who knew no more of the
life of the present day—or indeed of the real life of any day, even of
what they themselves actually believed and felt—than deep-sea oysters in
their bed know of Alpine flowers.  Even her father—  In this remote
desert he had lost what knowledge of life he formerly possessed.  She
was now developed enough to realize that he in fact never did know much
about life, that his was a book education only.  She had journeyed for
help in vain; she was still alone, dependent wholly upon her own courage
and resource.

"Don’t you wish we hadn’t come, mamma?" said Winchie when they were in
the room assigned them.

"No," she replied truthfully.  She was watching the hickory flames in a
calmer mood than she had known for weeks; at least she had got away
where she could think, could get an outside point of view upon the
posture of her affairs.  "No, indeed," she went on to Winchie leaning
against her knee and looking up at her.  "No, I feel better already."

"Then I guess I can stand it," said the boy with a sigh.

"You don’t know about the hill where we can coast."

As he had never coasted, this did not lighten the impression made on him
by the gloomy farmhouse sitting room, its walls and ceilings covered
with somber paper, by the shriveled grandparents, with deep-sunk,
lack-luster eyes, by the sharp, sour faces of the two old maids.  But
next day, when the sun came out and the farmhands beat down a track on
the long hill, Winchie found the situation vastly improved.  Flat on her
breast on a sled, with the boy breathless and happy upon her back, she
initiated him into the raptures of "belly-buster."

"Why, mamma, you look like a little girl, not a bit grown up," cried he
after they had been at it all morning and were tugging up the hill for
one last, magnificent rush down before going home to dinner.  And she
did indeed seem to be a sister of Winchie’s, one hardly in her teens. Of
course, the short skirt and her smallness of stature helped.  But it was
in her cheeks, in her eyes, in the curve of her lips as she showed her
white teeth in the happiest of smiles.

"I _am_ a little girl," declared she.  And before starting out with him
after dinner she did her hair in two long braids that hung below her
waistline.

They coasted every day; they took long sleigh rides, long romping walks;
they hunted rabbits, went fishing through the ice, were uproarious
outside the house and in—the latter to the scandal of the three women of
the family, who regarded such goings-on as clearly forbidden in the
Scriptures.  Even Sunday wasn’t so bad as might have been expected; for
it snowed too violently for Mrs. Benedict to take them to the church
where her favorite doctrines were expounded, and they slipped away to
the glorious outdoors. In a sheltered hollow under a shelf of rock they
built an enormous snow man, with a top hat of bark.  They ate what
Winchie regarded as the most wonderful meal of his life at the cottage
of one of the farmhands.  Never before had he seen such brown brownbread
or such molassessy molasses or eaten off such big, strong dishes that
there wasn’t the least danger of breaking, no matter what you did to
them. And he was fascinated by the farmhand’s wife and daughter, both
acting their company best and eating with the little finger of each hand
stuck straight out.  And in a box in the corner of the room where they
ate was a most exciting brood of little chickens, chirping and
squeaking.  And in the midst of dinner a huge, hairy, black dog suddenly
snatched a piece of meat from the farmhand’s plate and retired to the
kitchen with it.  "Ain’t he a caution?" said the farmhand, and Winchie
thought he certainly was.

Courtney was like those who put out to sea, leaving their troubles at
the one shore, not to think of them until they touch the other.  All
around were the white hills, and there seemed to be no beyond.  She
abandoned her plan of studying her situation.  She stopped thinking; she
ate and slept, and played with the boy, and pretended that she was the
little girl she looked, home from school for the holidays, and half
hoping somehow something would happen so that there wouldn’t be any
school any more.  She did not think, but she hoped.  How?  What?  Where?
She did not know; simply hope, that can burst the strongest grave
despair ever buried it in.

Well along in the second week, toward the middle of the afternoon, she
and Winchie were on the long hill, rounding out one more happy day.  She
was as happy as he. When all is lost save youth and health, what is
really lost? She on her breast on the sled and he sprawled along her
back, his arms round her neck, they shot down the steep with shouts and
screams.  They stopped, all covered with flying snow, in a soft bank
beneath which the zigzag fence was deep buried.  They rolled in the
snow, washed each other’s faces, stood up—were within a few feet of a
man in a fur-lined coat almost to his heels.  They stared, astounded.
Then Winchie’s face darkened and hers grew more radiant still as the
tears sprang to her eyes.

"Basil!" she murmured, Winchie forgotten.  "Oh—_Basil_!"  And all in
that instant the misery of those months of despair was gloriously
transformed into joy.

"Courtney!" he cried.  "How beautiful you are!"

He was extraordinarily handsome himself at that moment. Love is a
matchless beautifier; and if ever love shone from a human countenance,
it was shining, irradiating from his just then.  With Winchie jealously
watchful they shook hands.  "Aren’t you and Winchie going to speak to
each other?" she asked.  And Basil, with reluctance and some confusion
held out a hand which the boy very hesitatingly touched.

"I’ll pull your sled to the top for you," Basil offered. "Get on,
Winchie."

The boy planted his feet more firmly in the snow.  "We were going home,"
said Courtney.

"Get on, Winchie," cried Basil friendlily.  "I’ll haul you."

"I’m going to walk," replied the boy sullenly.

Courtney understood.  "Get on, Winchie," said she. "I’ll pull it."

The boy obeyed.  The rope was long, so Basil felt free to speak in a
lowered voice.  "Seeing you—hearing you—touching you—  O my darling! my
Courtney!"

She forgot where she was, who she was, everything but love.  Love!  The
road danced before her.  The cry of the chickadees, the twitter of the
snowbirds, the call of Bob White from the fence sounded like supernal
music in her ears.  The blood tingled and dizzied her nerves.  Love
again!  "You care—still?" she murmured.

"Care?  There’s only you for me in all the world."

She caught her breath, like the swinger at the long swing’s dizziest
height when it halts to begin the delirious descent.  "Love!" she
murmured.  "Love!"

"And I know you love me," he went on.  "I’ve never doubted—not once.
I’ve tried to doubt, but I couldn’t.  Up before me would come those dear
eyes of yours, and—Courtney, there isn’t a kiss—or a caress—hardly a
touch of the hands you and I have ever lived that I haven’t felt again
and again."

"Don’t!" she pleaded, her eyes swimming.  "Don’t, or I’ll break down.
My love—my love!"

"I don’t know what would have become of me," he went on, "if I hadn’t
known you’d send for me—yes—in spite of your note.  I expected it, for I
knew you wouldn’t be able to come.  The more I thought, the clearer I
saw.  Not to go any further, there was the boy."  He glanced round at
Winchie; the angry gray-green eyes were fixed upon him. He glanced away,
disconcerted.  But he forgot Winchie when his eyes returned to her.
"Beautiful!  Beautiful—little girl," he murmured, his look sweeping her
small, perfect figure to the edge of her short skirt.  "I like your new
way of wearing your hair."

She blushed.  "I did it to make me feel young.  I’ve been feeling so
old—old and tired and lonely."

"Thank God, you sent for me."

"Sent for you!  A hundred times a day in thought."  She laughed aloud,
sparkling like the ice-cased boughs in the late afternoon sun.  "A
thousand thousand times in longing—every time my heart beat."

"Oh, it is so good to be with you!"  He drew in a huge draught of the
clean, cold, vital air.  "Does the sun anywhere else shine on such
happiness as this?  But I’ve been mad with happiness ever since the word
came."

"The word?  What word?"

"Vaughan’s letter.  I knew you got him to write it."

Courtney stopped short.  "I!" she exclaimed.  "I don’t know what you
mean."

"I got a letter from him three days ago.  He asked me to take another
quarter interest in his work—said he needed the money, as he found he’d
been using more of his own in it than he could afford with justice to
his family——"

"Oh!" cried Courtney sharply.

"What is it?" asked Basil.

She was looking straight ahead.  "Nothing—nothing. Go on."  And she
started to walk again.

"Your cry sounded like pain."

"Did it?  Go on."

"I assumed you had at last succeeded in making the chance for me to come
back.  So, I telegraphed I’d accept, provided he’d let me work with him
again—and that I’d be on at once to talk things over.  I took the first
train—and here I am."

"Yes, here.  That’s another mystery to explain."

"Nothing simpler.  The station man at Wenona told me you were visiting
your father.  I jumped at the chance. I can say I thought you all were
here.  Anything more?"

"I saw the announcement of your engagement."

"It’s broken.  I couldn’t marry her—couldn’t have done it in any
circumstances.  So, I gave her what she was losing by our not marrying.
And I’m free.  You want me to stay?"

He spoke indifferently about the money he had given up, and he evidently
felt indifferent.  She would have been hurt had he acted otherwise.  At
the same time it was a measure of his generosity and of his love, a
sordid but certain measure.  She regarded that payment as a sort of
ransom—his ransom for the right to come to her.  "That was his price for
the right," thought she.  "He paid it without a second thought—would
have paid any price.  My price for the right to be his may be harder.
But I must pay, too—as generously as he."

He was watching her anxiously.  "Courtney, I can’t go away!"

"You mustn’t," replied she.  Then a reason—the reason—the solution of
her life problem—came to her as if by inspiration.  "It’s my only chance
to be a good woman. That sounds strange, doesn’t it?"

"Not to me.  I understand.  If you hadn’t sent for me soon—" he checked
himself.

"What?"

"You didn’t know that my coming here last spring—and loving you—cured me
of the drinking habit.  I know, it’s stupid and disgusting.  I used to
loathe myself when I gave way.  But it’s the only resort in loneliness.
And if I realized that you were lost to me, what would I care?"

She nodded sympathetically.  "I was going all to pieces, in another way.
I was sliding down as fast as Winchie and I were coasting the hill back
there.  I was going the way of all women who have no love—grown-up
love—in their lives.  I know now, the reason I used to keep myself
together and built myself up and looked after things was because I was
waiting and hoping for love, and was expecting it.  Love is all of a
woman’s life, as things are run in this world—at present."

"And quite enough it is, too," said he.

"No," disagreed she.  "But let that pass.  If I went back to—to that
life—alone, I’d be going to ruin.  And I’d probably drag him and Winchie
down with me.  A woman of that unburied-dead sort drags down everybody
about her....  You’ve only to look round, in any station of life, to see
those women by the scores.  Some few are saved by children—not many and
they are of a different nature from me—from most women, I think....  If
I don’t go back, I either go to you disgraced, a shame to my family, a
lifelong stain on my boy here, a miserable, afraid dependent of
yours....  No, don’t interrupt; I’ve thought it all out....  Or, I’d
plunge into a life of social dissipation. If possible, that sort of
woman is worse for herself and for her husband and children than the
domestic rotter. A chattering, card-playing gadabout.  Possibly I might
remain true to my husband, but—  If the world weren’t the fool it is, it
would have discovered long ago that there are worse vices than—"  As
always when she forced herself to say frank, merciless things, she
looked straight into his eyes with defiant audacity—"worse vices than
ours."

"But—" he began, shifting his gaze and coloring.

"Oh, yes, it is.  Don’t make any mistake about it.  But I know lots of
’good’ women—liars, gossips, naggers, petty swindlers of their husbands,
envious, malicious, spiteful—lots and lots of so-called good women
beside whom I’d feel white as this snow."

"Rather!" exclaimed Basil.

"So—if you’ll go with me—I’m going home—to make it a home—to be a good
mother—to give Richard at least his money’s worth in care and comfort
and—"  She looked at him with eyes suddenly solemn—"and that is all,
Basil—all. It’s all I can give him, all he has the right to.... I’m
going home to be a good woman, if you’ll come and be there too."

"There’s only one life for me—to be as near you as you’ll let me."

A long silence.  Then she again, sadly: "I don’t know how it will work
out.  But—what else is there for us? We’re not heroes.  We’re human.  We
must do the best we can.  Together we may survive.  Apart, I at least
will perish—and destroy those near me.  I suppose I’m all wrong.
But"—with a sigh—"I’m doing the best I can."

Silence again.  Then he, deeply moved: "I’ll try to be worthy of you,
dear."

"Worthy of _me_?  For God’s sake, don’t say those things.  There isn’t
any pedestal I wouldn’t fall off of and break to bits....  Basil—"
wistfully—"you don’t care for me in just a physical way—do you, dear?"

"I care for you in every way," he answered.  "Courtney, I never believed
I could respect a woman as I respect you.  You know, men aren’t brought
up really to respect women—or themselves, for that matter."

"Then—couldn’t we try to—"  She lowered her head, faltered—"couldn’t we
live as if we were engaged only?"

"Why should we?" he cried.

"I know it’s only a fancy.  But fancies count more than facts....  I’d
feel less the—"  She faltered—paused.

"Yes—yes—I understand.  And—  Well, it doesn’t do a man any good to be
pretending friendship and smiling in another fellow’s face, when all the
time—  I’ll try, Courtney—  But—it won’t be exactly easy."

Her gaze burned for an instant on his, then dropped. "I should hope
not!" murmured she.

They, absorbed in each other, moved so slowly along the road that
Winchie, silent, motionless, sullen, upon the sled they were trailing as
far as the rope permitted, was stiff with cold.  But he did not murmur.
By the time they reached the door of the farmhouse, Courtney and Basil
had it all planned.  He was to leave immediately after supper, was to go
at once to Vaughan, make the arrangements, reinstall himself.  She was
to come home in three or four days—unless Vaughan sent, asking her to
come sooner.  He dined with the family at the farmhouse, made himself so
agreeable that they were all pleased with him—even sister Ann whose
bitterness over her failure at what she secretly regarded as woman’s
only excuse for being alive, took the unoriginal disguise of aggressive
man-hating.  At six o’clock he drove away in the starlight with a merry
jingling of sleigh bells that echoed in Courtney’s happy heart.  The
cold was intense; but she felt only warmth—that delicious warmth that
comes from within.  She stood on the little front porch, with the stars
brilliant above and the snow white and smooth over hill and valley.  She
watched the swift dark sleigh—listened to those laughing bells, their
music growing fainter and fainter—but not in her heart. She was so happy
that the tears were in her eyes and the sobs in her throat.  It was for
her one of those moments in life when she asked nothing more, could
imagine nothing that would add to joy.  Love again!—and oh, what exalted
love, to warm the heart and fill it with light and joy, to brighten
every moment of life, to guide her up and ever up.

Winchie, standing beside her and looking up at her rapt face, tugged
angrily at her skirts.




                                 *XVII*


When the mail cart on the third afternoon failed to bring a letter from
Richard, she decided that prudence had been satisfied, that she need
wait no longer.  Toward four she and Winchie set out, snuggled deep in
furs and straw in the rear of a huge country sleigh.  The roads were
perfect; the snow was like a strand at low tide, rolled smooth and firm
by the broad tires of high tide’s billows.  The big horses, steaming as
if they were engines, flew as if they were a wind.  But her impatient
heart was always far ahead, fretting at their laggard pace.

They dashed into the outskirts of Wenona.  The journey was ended except
the mile and a half round the curve of the lake.  She became all at once
serenely calm.  Life her real life—was now about to begin.  It was far
from the life she would have chosen, had she been prearranging her own
fate.  However—who could live an ideal life in such a topsy-turvy world?
Nature and conventionality ever at war; right and wrong, not two
straight paths, one up, the other down, but a tangle, a maze, a
labyrinth.  One must often travel the path of the wrong in order to
reach the path of the right; and keeping to the path of the right often
meant arriving in a hopeless network of blind alleys of the wrong.  She
was in the confused state about right and wrong characteristic of this
era of transition that has seen the crumbling of the despotism of dogma,
and has not yet received, or created, a moral guidance to replace it.
"Life is a compromise, unless one lives alone and miserably and
uselessly," thought she.  "My life’s to be a thistle with fig grafts.
I’ll do the best I can with it—Basil and I.  With him to help me—his
strength and character and self-denying love—with him to help, all may
go well.  Is my compromise—Basil’s and mine—worse than those almost
everyone has to make?  If so, then they ought to educate women
differently, and change marriage."

And when the sleigh reached the drive-front porch, making a dashing and
musical arrival, she was in a mood of moral exaltation that might have
stirred the enthusiasm of a saint—that is, a saint ignorant of the
foundations of that mood or the processes by which it had reared itself
skyward.  Saints who are wise in the ways of humanity do not interrogate
too closely the glitter and lift of moral temples; they know humanity
has only humble materials with which to build.

The doors opened wide and, in a flood of bright warm air, redolent of
the perfume of flowers, out came Dick to welcome them.  "I _am_ glad!"
cried he.  Because of the peculiar relations long established between
them—relations such as must exist in some degree between a husband and a
wife before the triangular situation can ever even threaten—because of
these peculiar relations, she had not anticipated and did not feel the
least embarrassment.  She was not defying or ignoring her husband; she
had no husband. After he swung Winchie to the porch he turned to do the
same service for her.  But she had quickly disengaged herself from the
robes and was standing beside him.  He looked into her face, fully
revealed by the pour of soft light from the hall.  "Your trip certainly
has done you good," said he.

"Thank you," replied she absently, presenting her left cheek for the
necessary formality of the occasion.  Her attention was wholly
elsewhere.

In the hall before her there had appeared two people, hanging back
discreetly, so that they would not intrude upon the family reunion.
Basil, she expected.  The woman beside him so astonished her that she
forgot to be glad to see him.  _Who_ was she?  This tall, slender girl
with the proud, regular features, the attractively done dark hair, the
big, honest brown eyes?  She glanced at Basil, standing beside this
lovely girl and making a laughing remark; her feminine sight instantly
noted how the remark was received by the girl—the flattering glance and
smile a marriageable woman rarely wastes upon anything from one of her
own sex or from an ineligible man.  And through Courtney shot a pang
that dissolved her structure of moral uplift as a needle thrust
collapses a toy balloon. Who was this woman?—this _young_ woman—this
_tall_ woman—this _handsome_ woman—so pleased with Basil Gallatin?

"Aren’t you surprised to find Helen March here?" Dick was now saying.

Helen March!  So, that scrawny, raw-boned girl, all freckles and
pimples, and unable to manage her mouth, the Helen March she had seen
three years before and had not seen since—so, that prim and homely gawk
had developed into this stately creature!  Prim, still—unless that
expression was the familiar maidenly pose to attract wife hunters.  But
certainly neither homely nor awkward. She even dressed her hair well,
and wore her clothes with quite an air.  All this Courtney saw and felt
and thought in a few twinklings of an eye—for in such circumstances a
woman’s mind works with the rapidity of genius, and with genius’s grasp
of essential detail.  Helen was advancing.

"Don’t you recognize me, Courtney?" she asked.  The voice was one of
those honest, pleasant voices that disarm the most cynical pessimists
about human nature—the voice that makes the _blasé_ city man fall to
dreaming of taking a country girl to wife.

"_Now_ I do, of course," said Courtney sweetly.  And the two embraced
and kissed.

To do this, Helen had to bend, as she was more than a head the taller.
She bent with not a suggestion of condescension in manner or in thought.
Nevertheless Courtney, for the first time in her life painfully
sensitive about her stature, flamed and was resentful—and in her scorn
of her own pettiness felt tinier within than without.  True, Helen’s
figure was commonplace, the bust too high and ominously large for her
age, the hips already faintly menacing, the waist and arms somewhat too
short for the great length of leg.  True, her own figure was—certainly
better.  Still, Helen had that advantage of height—could look at Basil
level-eyed, could make her seem—short!  And this Helen here to stay
indefinitely!

There was pathos in the slow, sweet smile Courtney gave Basil as their
trembling hands met in what seemed to the others a formal greeting.  She
turned away with a sigh.  Just as she, the thirsty, the desert-bound,
was all ready to rush forward and drink—the mirage vanished. Was it to
be always so?  Was life to be ever a succession of mirages, vanishing at
approach, only to reappear and revive hope—and cheat again?  Through her
mind flashed the memory of the first one—an indelible memory, always for
her symbolic of vain expectation: A fourth of July when she was a very
small child—how she awakened at sunrise, rushed to the window to find
sky clear and world radiant and ready for the picnic that was to be her
first great positive joy; how she was dressed in her best, in wonderful
new white frock, in white stockings and shoes and white bows covering
the top buttons, shimmering sash of pale green, and bows of pale green
on her braids; how, just as she descended in all her glory to issue
forth, down came the rain—in floods—and no picnic, nothing but stay at
home all day and weep and watch the downpour.  "It was my horoscope,"
thought she, as she stood there in the hall too sad for bitterness over
her spoiled home-coming. "Is it fate?  Or, is it somehow my fault?  My
fault, I suppose.  I must be asking of life something no one—at least,
no woman—has the right to expect."

She was near the library door, with Winchie on its threshold staring
round big-eyed and crying, "Oh, mamma Courtney.  Look!"  His eyes were
no more wondering than her own.  She had been too disheartened to make
the library over into a conservatory that year; now, here it was
transformed into a conservatory—the carpet up from the hardwood floor,
plants beautiful for bloom or for foliage or for both in boxes, in jars,
in pots—everywhere. A conservatory like that of former years, but more
elaborate.

The others were laughing and watching her face.  So she exclaimed "I am
surprised!" in the indefinite tone the listener can easily adapt to his
expectations.  But she was not pleased—far from it.  Another fierce pang
of jealousy.  She, modest about her own abilities, did not realize that
the room lacked just the finishing touch of her exquisite taste.  To her
it seemed better far than she could have done.  Why, she hadn’t been
needed, or missed even!  Things went on as well in her absence as when
she was here.  And near her, side by side, were Basil and Helen—how she
could feel them!—so well matched physically—and he fair, she dark.  And
Courtney had not that self-complacent, satisfied vanity which shelters
so many of us from any and all misgivings and doubts.

"Helen did most of it," explained Vaughan.  "She’s a trump, you’ll find.
Look out, Helen, or we’ll make you do all the work."

"Cousin Dick proposed it and really carried it out," protested Helen in
her school-teacherish or collegiate speech and manner.  "And Mr.
Gallatin was invaluable in showing us how you had it last winter.  We
wanted to get it exactly the same."

Courtney turned brilliant, grateful eyes on Basil.  "So, you remembered,
did you?" she ventured to say, sure her meaning and her tone would pass
the others safely.

Basil flushed.  "You can judge for yourself," said he.

"I’m so overcome I don’t know what to say."  Their smiling, friendly
faces, all bent upon her, made her natural generosity burst forth like
April’s unending green at the first warmth of the sun.  Her eyes filled.
"Thank you—thank you all!" she cried.  "I am so—_so_—happy!"  And she
kissed Helen again, ashamed of her mean impulses toward one whose
aloneness and poverty commanded kindness and consideration and help from
another woman, especially from a woman who had known the bitterness of
dependence and aloneness.

Good sense and decent instincts, having driven off jealousy, held the
field—not without occasional alarms and excursions, but still
decisively.  It was the merriest party that had gathered about the
mahogany dining-room table since Colonel ’Kill imported it from beyond
the mountains, along with sundry novelties in those parts, in that early
day—carpets and curtains and window glass, wall paper and carved beds
and crystal chandeliers.  In Colonel ’Kill’s time the atmosphere had
been genial but austere; Aunt Eudosia, during her brief reign between
his death and her own, had maintained his traditions reverently; and
Courtney had struggled not altogether with success, though bravely and
resolutely, against the atmosphere that lingered on after all her
brightening changes.  But that night, the spell was broken.  Dick put
aside his chemistry; Basil and Courtney forgot him and their burden of
deceit.  Helen belied her mourning which, as Courtney had shrewdly
guessed, was mere formality anyhow.  Everyone was gay, even jealous
little Winchie, devoting himself to Helen, determined to make her love
him.  And Courtney was gayest of all; was not that vacant place at the
table filled once more?  Her heart overflowed with joy and her lips and
eyes with laughter each time she looked in that direction and saw—_him_!
Everyone was gay except old Nanny, listening sourly to the merriment
that came through door and hall into kitchen and sounded like a burst
from a ballroom whenever Lizzie was passing in or out.  "Poor young
man!" muttered Nanny to her dishes and pans. "If he only knowed the
whited sepulchre he’s living amidst, what a holocaust there’d be."  She
did not know what holocaust meant, having got merely its vague sense
from a sermon; thus, it gave her a conception of anarchy and chaos far
beyond the scope of words she understood.

Courtney’s emerald eyes, dancing and laughing though they were,
scrutinized Basil.  Not that she really suspected him; she simply wished
to fortify herself against the folly and the unhappiness of suspicion—as
women look under a bed before getting into it.  Having fortified
herself, she concentrated on Helen—Helen, the homeless, the unmarried,
the eager to be married.  There the results of her scrutiny were not so
satisfactory.  Basil would have called Helen’s manner mere civility; and
perhaps, in strict justice, it was nothing more.  But Courtney the
woman, judging Helen the woman, saw the hidden truth beneath the surface
truth—saw that Helen was not without an instinct for a possible customer
for the virtue so carefully nurtured against the coming of an
opportunity for it to expand in the garden of matrimony with the flower
and leaf and fruit of wife and mother.  Courtney judged fairly, conceded
that Helen was the reverse of forward, was using no arts, no subtleties.
But the candidate for matrimony showed in her charmingly receptive and
appreciative attitude toward the young man.  The danger which Courtney
foresaw and feared lay in the fact that Basil and Helen were both
attractive.  To Courtney it seemed a question of a very brief time when,
without any effort whatever on her part, Helen must fall in love with
him.  What then?  A well-bred, pretty woman in love is always more and
ever more attractive to the man she centers upon.  And Helen was
free—and could be honorable throughout!

As Courtney undressed for bed, these reflections, so forbidding of
aspect, faced her whichever way she turned. "I like Helen," she thought,
"and it’s decent and right to give her a home.  If I were what I ought
to be—ought to try to be—I’d give her every opportunity to win Basil.
She’s got to have some one to support her.  I’m provided for.  It’s mean
of me to stand in her way."  She found some cheer in the reflection
that, while most women would straight off hate Helen and look on her as
an impudent interloper, she herself had generosity enough to be just in
thought at least.  "But I’m human," said she.  "Helen has got to go.
She doesn’t love him.  I do.  She doesn’t need him.  I do.  She’s got to
go!"

It was her habit to sit on the rug before the fire in her sitting room,
and do her hair for the night; then she would sometimes stretch herself
out flat upon her breast and read by the fire light or watch it and
dream or think.  She was lying that way, head pillowed upon a book and
face toward the fire, when Dick opened the door, glanced in, entered. So
absorbed was she that she did not know he was in the room until he
spoke.

"It’s like what Nanny would call a special providence, isn’t it?" said
he, seating himself on the sofa parallel to the fireplace but well back
from it.  He had a long dressing gown over his pajamas and was smoking a
last cigarette.

"Special providence?  What?" inquired she without turning her head.  His
entrance had not interrupted her train of thought.  Her answer was, as
usual, a reflex action from her surface mind.

"Why, Basil’s coming back."

No reply.  She was not thinking of Dick’s statement of Basil’s return as
coming from him but as if she had herself begun to revolve it of her own
accord.

"And Helen’s being here."

A restless shiver.  She was unconscious of Dick’s presence. She was
gazing absorbed at the proposition: Helen is here.

"It’s just as we wanted it," he went on.

The lithe, delicately formed body grew tense.  "Speak for yourself," she
said curtly.

Richard received this rebuff in silence.  "I know you don’t like Basil,"
said he at length.  "And, it’s true he was a tank and a tear-about at
college——"

There he stopped, shamefaced.  He forgot he had told her about Basil; he
felt it was undignified and unworthy gossip now that he had matrimonial
designs upon him. "That slipped out," he said to her apologetically.  "I
never intended to tell you.  Anyhow, he has dropped all that sort of
thing, and I don’t believe he’ll ever turn loose again....  I wonder why
that girl broke the engagement. He tells me he’s free, and I suspect he
wanted to come back because he’s pretty badly cut up....  You will be
nice to him, Courtney?—and help him and Helen along? They were intended
for each other—height—contrast of coloring——"

Courtney sat up impatiently, turned her back to the fire to warm it,
clasped her knees in her arms.  She was conscious of him now, vaguely,
unpleasantly conscious, though the ideas he had suggested still held
most of her attention.  Gradually she became uncomfortable; no, it was
not the cold.  Her wandering glance happened upon Richard’s face.  His
expression—  That was it!  Not cold, but the sense of being looked at by
eyes that had not the right.  She blushed furiously from head to feet,
had an impulse to snatch the rug about her and dart from the room.

"You are—_beautiful_!" he exclaimed, rising.  "I was just contrasting
you with Helen March this evening.  She’s undoubtedly handsome.  Has
height, and go, and, for a girl, really a surprising amount of——"

Courtney was not listening.  She was thinking of her oversight in not
locking her doors into the hall.

"Of charm—aside from the freshness that’s about all there is to most
girls, I imagine."

She must be careful not to irritate him, not to rouse him to the
vigilance that nothing can escape.  What a luckless beginning of a new
life!

"And you’re so well now—so alive——"

"I’m all but dead," she declared, pretending a yawn. "I must go to bed."
She sprang lightly up.  "Good night," she said.  And to take away the
sting—for, his slight wince showed her there was sting—she stood on
tiptoe, hands behind her and face upturned.

His lips touched her cheek hesitatingly; fired by the contact, he took
her in his arms and kissed her.  She did not draw away; an instinct of
prudence, not a deliberate thought, restrained her.  She flushed from
head to foot, her modesty wounded, her pride abased.  "Good night," said
he, lingeringly.

"Good night," she echoed, turning away to screen the fire.

Half an hour later all the lights in the house were out. She had gone to
bed, but not to sleep.  She suddenly sat up, gazed eagerly toward the
window giving on the small veranda.  It was open for the night; the
shutters were latched, however, and through them came intensely cold air
and some faint light.  She thought she heard a tapping at the
shutter—that shutter she had so often thrown wide in the hope that Basil
had secretly returned.  She listened.  After a long wait, again the
tapping—so soft that only the attention of an expectant listener would
have been attracted.

"Basil!" she murmured.  "I must have been expecting him."

She was about to dart to the window when there came a thought like a
blow in the face flinging her back and making her cover her head.  First
the one man; now the other.  "God!" she muttered.  "How they will
degrade me, between them."

No, it should not be!  She grew angry with Basil.  At the first
opportunity, breaking his promise, trying to tempt her to become what he
could not but despise.  _That_ was what he called _love_!  And how
poorly he must think of her! ... She uncovered her head, listened.  No
repetition of the sound.  She ran to the window, opened the shutter.  No
one!  Yes—the snow on the rail had been disturbed.  She leaned out.
Snow—the black boughs—the biting midnight air—stars—the crescent moon
with a pendant planet—the distant muffled sound of a horse stamping in
its stall.  She closed the shutter, went shivering back to bed—heartsick
with disappointment.




                                *XVIII*


When she at last went to sleep it was like a ship going down in a storm.
But she slept nine hours without a dream; and she awakened in that
buoyant mood with which perfect health of body will triumph over
whatever heaviness of soul.  Her troubles seemed largely fanciful, were
certainly anticipatory; she would push steadily forward, and all would
be well.

When she descended, the two men had breakfasted and gone, and Winchie
was out on the lawn playing at snow man with the Donaldson children and
their governess. Helen, still at table with coffee and newspaper,
greeted her so honest of eye and of voice that she was altogether
ashamed of her thoughts of evening and night before. Also, Helen did not
look especially well in the mornings. Sleep swelled her face, her
eyelids; her skin inclined to be cloudy; her hair hung rather stringily
about her brow. And in négligée the defect of too much bust and too
short waist seemed worse than it was.  "I must see that she gets a
proper corset," thought Courtney.  "Like so many women, she doesn’t
realize that corset is three fourths of the battle for figure."  She
studied Helen with an artist’s eye and an artist’s enthusiasm for
bringing out the best, the beautiful.  "Yes," she said to herself,
"Helen can be made a perfect wonder for looks.  I _must_ try it."  And
then she knew she had never really intended to send Helen away.  She who
had suffered so much from the tyranny of dependence—it would be
impossible for her to exercise that tyranny over another.  "I don’t want
to send her away.  But if I did want to, I couldn’t, no matter what
happened.  I might think I would, and try to compel myself to do it.
But when it came to the pinch, I’d remember—and I couldn’t.  No other
human being shall ever know through me the sort of humiliation I bear."

She was ashamed of her fears about Basil, too.  "As if he hadn’t known
lots of women.  As if our love were just the ordinary thing that passes
for love.  And Helen’ll help brighten things up—this house must not and
shall not be gloomy."  Then too—and this idea she did not definitely
express to herself—Helen would give her and Basil more freedom by
pairing off with Richard when they were all together.

Still more cheering were the thoughts that came from her mail.  From the
bank’s monthly statement she learned that Richard had for the first time
fixed an allowance sufficient for the position she was expected to
maintain. There is a minimum amount on which a family can live in a
certain style; every dollar below that means pinch, every dollar above
it luxury.  Courtney had at times been hard put to keep from going into
debt.  Many a woman, bred as she had been, as most American women
are—with small practical knowledge, with only the silly useless
"education" the usual school and college give, with no notion of values
or mistaken notions, with contempt for realities and reverence for
inanities—has in the same circumstances become hopelessly involved.  But
whatever the shortcomings in Mrs. Benedict’s system of bringing up her
children, she had certainly inculcated a horror of debt.  And as human
life and character are grounded upon material things if they have any
substantial foundation at all, this dread of debt had been and continued
to be one of the main factors in Courtney’s development.  It is amazing
how far a single cardinal _real_ principle, such as a fixed aversion to
debt, will go toward keeping any human being straight, toward bringing
them back to sense of the just and the right, when they have been
swerved by emotion or irresistible gale of circumstance.  But in human
affairs all the truly great powers are forces so quiet and move so close
to the ground that their existence is unsuspected; or if pointed out, it
is denied and scouted, and some windy fake of philosophy or politics or
superstition is hailed as the god in the machine.  Instead of going into
debt and playing the "refined, cultured lady," Courtney had set about
learning to economize without privation or meanness or tawdry pretense,
acquiring the supreme art of living—the getting of its full value for
every dollar.  It had been a hard schooling; she began to realize how
valuable, how invaluable.  With this additional allowance Richard was
now making, she saw what wonders of improvement she could work—she who
had been getting out of the smaller income what many women in Wenona,
spending four and five times as much, had not got.  Certainly, the sky
was brightening.

"If you haven’t taken a dislike to me," Helen was saying, "and are going
to let me stay a while, I’ll make myself useful.  In fact, I’ll not stay
if I don’t.  I must pay my way, and I can’t pay in money."

"Whatever you like," said Courtney, "if you’ll only stay.  We want you.
We need you."

Helen never forgot the warmth that cordial genuine tone sent through
her.  She didn’t try to put her thanks into words, for there are no
words for such real and deep feeling.  She simply looked at Courtney—a
look that more than rewarded her.  After a moment she went on in an
unsteady voice, "I could help—with Winchie.  I took a course in
kindergarten work at Tecumseh—and in housekeeping, too.  They really
teach things—real things—there. Then, I sew beautifully—the finest kind
of sewing."

"So I see," said Courtney, looking at the sacque Helen was wearing.  She
did not like the sacque, because she did not like flummery and
elaboration—and Helen had the poor girl’s weakness for both.  But she
did admire the quality of the work that had been put into it.

"You must let me do some sewing for you.  Do you like fine
underclothes?"

"Crazy about them."

"I knew you were," said Helen who, judging by Courtney’s dress and light
way of talking, had already clearly and finally made up her mind that
the verdict of "serious people" as to her cousin was just—a sweet,
light, pretty creature, fond of dress and all the frivolities.  "Just
you wait!  Mrs. Hargrave up at our town brought back some things from
Paris—perfectly wonderful!  All the women were excited about them.
Well, I know how to make them—and where the goods can be got.  Not
expensive, either."

"I’ll get the material," said Courtney, "and you can make some for both
of us."

"Then I took a course in fitting.  Don’t judge by the things I wear.  I
somehow can’t fit myself."

"It’s the corset," said Courtney.

"I suppose so.  I could never afford to have them made—or to buy the
best ready-made kind.  But I can do well for others.  I can teach your
dressmaker how to behave herself.  That’ll save you a lot of time and
worry, won’t it?"

"And work.  Now, I have to remake most of my things."

Courtney began to respect Helen.  The evening before, the girl, bent
upon making a favorable impression, had been a wholly different person.
She had seemed to Courtney stuffed to bursting with the familiar,
everywhere admired and nowhere admirable "idealism" that chokes thought
with cant and cumbers action with pretense.  She had displayed a
disquieting fondness for the "cultured" drivel about art and literature,
about morals and manners, that destroys sincerity and simplicity’s
strength, and creates the doleful dreary lack of individuality
characteristic of the so-called educated classes throughout the world.
Courtney had always had the courage to confess that these honored frauds
seemed to her ridiculous and wearisome. She assumed that Richard’s and
Basil’s admiring attention, as Helen "showed off" after the manner of
young girls, was politeness—or tribute to Helen’s good looks. Now that
she had discovered real virtues in Helen, she was not alarmed; for, she
had learned that men are not interested in such virtues in young women
but only in surface charms that stimulate their sex illusions.  "It’d
take a man who had been married at least once to appreciate Helen,"
thought she.

By the time Courtney finished breakfast, she had explained her plans and
Helen had made many intelligent suggestions.  They lost no time in
getting to work.  The morning flew, dinner was ready before they had
given it a thought.  Yes, Helen was a genuine addition, was just what
she needed.  "Yet I’ve no doubt Basil’ll think her stupid once he gets
used to her beauty and her sweetly pretty romantic pose for the
matrimonal game."

Dick and Basil came, and the merry party of the night before was
repeated.  Courtney noted with pleasure that Dick and Helen had taken a
fancy to each other.  Without her realizing it, this was a thorough test
of her absolute apartness from him; for, many a woman who is not in love
with her husband, who actively dislikes him, will yet be furiously
jealous of him—and by no means entirely from the sordid motive of fear
lest his being attracted elsewhere will end in lessening her own portion
of the income.  Dick showed that he thought Helen, tall of stature and
serious looking, an appreciative listener to his discourses on
chemistry; and Helen’s manner was indeed well calculated to deceive—a
man.  After dinner Dick led her up to his study further to explain some
things they had been discussing.  Winchie hurried away to resume play
with the Donaldsons, their governess having come for him—and Courtney
and Basil were free.

"It seems too good to be true," said Basil.  "How much better this is—in
every way—than what we’ve been condemning each other to....  Courtney, I
did a very indiscreet thing last night.  I came to your window—climbed
up by a ladder Jimmie had forgotten to lock up in the woodshed."

Courtney, rosy red, lowered her head.

"I don’t wonder you’re angry.  I’ll never do it again. When we have such
happiness as this, we must do nothing—_nothing_—to endanger it.  And I
want to say, you were right about—about what’s best for us.  The very
resolve to try has made everything seem entirely different. I’m not
ashamed when I look at Richard.  I can meet his eyes.  And with your
help I think I can wait patiently—and hope! ... Don’t you think it
possible those two might fall in love?"

She was startled, then fascinated by the idea.  "Why not?  If they only
would!"

"It’s just possible—barely possible."  They sat silent, reflecting on
this new hope.  Presently Basil went on, "They’re both very serious
minded.  And Miss March would be a real companion for him.  She’s
thoroughly intellectual, has quite a remarkable mind—more like a man’s."

At "intellectual" Courtney thought he was joking. She began to smile,
rather reluctantly—for, she did not like to laugh at so sweet and honest
a girl as Helen, even with one so near to her, so like another self.
Then his expression warned her that he was in earnest, that he really
regarded Helen’s "cultured" conversation as an indication of
intelligence, did not see that it was merely education of an elementary
and commonplace sort—the sort the colleges, those wholesale dealers in
ready-made mental clothes, dressed out all minds in, so that usually one
could tell a college man just as one could tell a ready-made suit. It
was at her face to laugh at him.  What an instance of woman’s good looks
blinding susceptible man to the truth about her internal furnishing, as
different from the real thing as a hotel parlor from the drawing-room of
a person of taste and individuality.  But she did not laugh; that would
have seemed meanness toward Helen—and Courtney, no lenient critic of her
own character, rather suspected herself of a sly ungenerous envy of
Helen’s stature.

"Yes," pursued Basil, "Miss March has a remarkable mind.  But I’m afraid
there’s no hope—about her and him. You see, she’s not at all that sort
of girl.  She’d rather die than commit any impropriety—that is, I mean
of course," he stammered, "she’s horribly prim."

Courtney would have thought nothing of it, had he not stumbled and
hastened on to explain.  But that agitated, apologetic embarrassment
changed "she’d rather die than commit any impropriety" from a
commonplace into a tribute to Helen which was a slur upon herself.  For
her love’s sake she resisted the temptation to pretend not to have heard
or felt.  "You like that sort of thing in a woman, don’t you?" said she,
with a lift of the eyebrows, those deep notes in her voice ominous.

"In Miss March—yes," blundered he.  "That is, in a young girl."  He
halted, burst out desperately, "You’re always suspecting me of not
respecting you."

There began to gather in Courtney an emotion that terrified her.  It was
not anger; it was not shame.  It seemed, rather, a sort of dread—though
of what she did not know—did not wish to know.  "Please, no protests,"
she said hurriedly.  "Let’s drop the subject."

"I do respect you," he said, doggedly.  "But if I didn’t"—there, he
looked at her—"I feel for you something that’s so much more than
respect—I love you."

She drew in her breath sharply, and her eyes gleamed and glistened as
they opened wide.  She had a way of opening her eyes upon him that made
him feel as if he were standing on a high place and about to plunge
dizzily into the sea at the call of a mermaid.  The silence that
followed was interrupted—rudely it seemed to them—by the return of Helen
and Dick.

"I need somebody in addition to you, Gallatin, to help out down at the
shop," said Dick, "and Helen is going to try."

"If Cousin Courtney is willing," said Helen.  "She may need me here, as
I told you."

Courtney had been standing with her fingers on the edge of the
chimney-piece, gazing between her arms into the fire.  She slowly turned
and regarded Richard.  Basil and Helen working together!

"Oh, no, she doesn’t need you here," asserted Vaughan. And catching
Courtney’s eye, he glanced from Basil to Helen and winked.

Courtney seemed not to see.  "Helen doesn’t want to go down there," said
she.  "Richard imagines, if people listen politely to his talk about
chemistry, that they’re as interested as he."

"Really I’d like it," said Helen, a good deal of nervousness in her
enthusiasm.

"She could try it anyhow," urged Vaughan.  "We need some one—don’t we,
Basil?"

"Yes," said Basil.  "You remember, I suggested you ought to ask Mrs.
Courtney to take a hand."

"Courtney!"  Vaughan laughed gayly.  "She has no fancy for anything
serious.  Now, Helen is masculine minded."

"Not a bit," declared Helen, much agitated by such an accusation, in
presence of an eligible young man.  "I’m so much a woman that I’m what’s
called a woman’s woman."

"Helen prefers to stay here," said Courtney.  "So, I think _I’ll_ try."

Richard stared and frowned.

She smiled at Basil.  "Richard is getting broad minded," she went on
slowly, selecting her words.  "A short time ago the idea of a woman in
that laboratory of his would have upset him quite.  I remember, when we
were first married, I made the most desperate efforts to get him to let
me help.  He was finally quite rude about it."  She spoke with no
suggestion of resentment; and, indeed, that time seemed so remote, so
like a part of another life or another person’s life that she felt no
resentment.

"I’m sure—we’ll—both—be glad to have you," stammered Basil.  He was
confused before the instinct-born thought that those few apparently
simple words of hers, so quietly and so good-humoredly spoken, were in
fact the story of the matrimonial ruin he had found when he came—and was
profiting by.

"I’ll come down to-morrow," Courtney went on. "Helen can look after
things here."

Helen could not conceal her relief; when the men were gone she said:
"I’m so glad you got me out of that.  Dick would have discovered what a
stupid I am in about one hour, and he’d have despised me.  I’d hate
that, as I think he’s wonderful.  How proud you must be of him.  Of
course, Basil is very sweet—and _such_ a gentleman—and how well he does
dress!  But Dick—  They’re not in the same class."

"No," said Courtney.

Just then Vaughan came hurrying in.  "I forgot something I wanted to say
to you, my dear," he began.  "Come in here——"

Helen took the hint and hastened away.  Vaughan went on, "Why on earth
didn’t you help me?"

Courtney looked interrogative.  She felt a curious impersonal anger
against him for having blunderingly interfered in her affairs.

"Didn’t you see," explained Richard somewhat irritably, "I had it all
fixed to bring those two together?"

"How dull of me!"

"It’s not too late.  All you have to do is back out and send her."

"And have her exhibit herself before him at her worst. And get him sick
of the very sight of her."  Richard began to look foolish.  Courtney
went on in the same tone of light mockery: "If you want a girl to marry
a man, or a man a girl, you mustn’t let them see too much of each other.
If possible, make it hard for them to get at each other."  The emerald
eyes were mockingly mirthful now.  "No such love-inducer in the world as
holding two people apart. And when two can see each other freely—to
their heart’s content—and satiation—why—"  She finished with a shrug,
her eyes looking straight into his.

"All right.  You women know each other best," said he, uncomfortable,
without being able to locate the cause.

"Helen will stay at home, like the homebody she is," pursued Courtney.
"And I’ll come to help you.  I’ve had it in mind for several days."

"You’re not in earnest about that!" cried Vaughan in alarm.  "Why,
what’d you do there?  You’d be in the way."

"More than Helen?"

"Frankly—yes," said Richard bluntly.  "As I said before, serious things
interest her.  You know, I dislike that sort of thing in a woman—am glad
to see that you’ve gotten entirely over it, as I knew you would.  But I
could have put up with it—for a while—to help Helen to a good husband
and Basil to a fine wife.  It wouldn’t have taken long—at least, I
thought not.  I admit I was probably wrong, and you right."

"Well—now that I’ve said I’d come, I’ll come," said Courtney.  "Helen’ll
take most of the detail here off my hands."

"If you really want to come—" said Dick, reluctant. "I suppose—after
what I’ve said—  Well, you can come for a few days."

Courtney was looking into the fire.  Not for a "few days" but for as
long as Basil worked with those dangerous chemicals.  If anything
happened—they would be together.  Richard was looking at her; but he
thought it was the fire light that was giving her the strange, somehow
terrible expression which yet enhanced her beauty and her charm.

"How serious you look," said he.  "Really, quite tragic—in that light."

"Yes, it must be the way the light falls," replied she. "Or is it
because I’ve mislaid my pet powder rag?"

Next morning as soon as Courtney dispatched her household routine she
went down to the Smoke House and appeared before Richard in his
laboratory for the first time since that morning after the homecoming,
long, long ago in that other life.  With a platinum rod he was slowly
stirring some fiery mixture of a dark purple color in a big iron
crucible.  She saw that the fumes were poisonous, as his nose and mouth
were protected by a respirator.  As on the previous visit she stood
silent in the doorway watching him.  She had long since passed the stage
of comparisons and contrasts; and her mind was altogether upon the
present and the future, as an intelligent young mind is extremely apt to
be.  So, she was not thinking of that previous visit, but was simply
interested in what he was doing—in his work, which she had now resolved,
with an experienced woman’s determination, to make her own work also, no
matter what opposition she might encounter.  Her achievements in house
and gardens, in bringing up Winchie, in breaking through the barriers of
moral convention so powerful round a woman born and bred as she had
been—these feats had wonderfully developed her will, had replaced
shyness and timidity with quiet self-confidence.

When the contents of the crucible cooled and he took off the respirator,
she spoke.  "I see you’ve run up a partition."

He glanced at her with a frown—not severe but irritated, as at the
persistent naughtiness of a sweet and charming child.  "Oh, you’ve
come—have you? ... Yes—the partition gives Basil and me each his own
shop.  I like to work alone, whenever it’s possible."

She advanced calmly, indifferent to his unfriendliness. "Then you don’t
want me to help _you_?"  She put all her diplomacy of tone and manner
into that little speech.  She knew how much depended upon this "entering
wedge"—this getting tolerated within those walls.

"What a whimsical creature you are!"  Dick was still vexed, but half
laughing, too.  She was so delicate and graceful, so fascinating to the
eye; and she seemed to him absurdly, quaintly out of place there.
"Basil!" he called. "Gallatin!"

Gallatin, in a blouse, rubber apron and gloves appeared from the other
part of the shop.

"Well—here’s the—the ’prentice," said Dick.  "You’re not busy nowadays.
Take charge of her."

"It’ll be a great pleasure, I’m sure," he stammered. He looked about as
uncomfortable at sight of her as had Richard.  Demurely she followed him
into his compartment. As the partition did not extend to the ceiling,
they had to content themselves with an exchange of eloquent glances.
Then, taking the tone of gentleman chemist to not overbright and densely
ignorant lady visitor at a laboratory, he began to explain to her the
names and uses of things, and to demonstrate how to use them.

For the entire morning he talked and illustrated, thoroughly enjoying
himself at making a fine impression with his display of superior
knowledge.  He told her little she did not already know.  But she was
not so tactless as to spoil his pleasure or hurt his vanity.  She
listened and tried; and when he complimented her on her quickness in
learning, she showed delight at being praised.  In the afternoon he
allowed her to practice his teachings unassisted—set her at weighing a
little nitrate of potassium precipitate in the gold and ivory and
aluminum balances. She had done this sort of things a hundred times, but
was meek under his elaborations of cautioning and explaining.

"I worked a lot in laboratories at school," said she ingenuously, when
his guidance became a little tiresome. "It’s beginning to come back to
me."

He smiled in a way that reminded her of Richard. "All right.  Do the
best you can," said he.  "We’ll not expect much of you for the present.
I’m afraid you’ll soon give up."

She looked at him.  "I’m here to stay," said she, "You’ll not get rid of
me."

"But the work’s very hard—not at all feminine."

"That suits me.  For, I’m not at all feminine, myself—what men mean by
feminine."

He laughed, went about his own business.  As she sat at the balances,
her whole mind on the needle she was watching through the reading glass,
she felt herself caught from behind.  She turned her laughing face
upward and backward, and they kissed.  "Isn’t it splendid!" he exclaimed
under his breath.  "Yes—you must stay."  It had been part of her plan of
life that they should never caress. Suddenly she realized how impossible
this rule was—and how foolish.  On occasions—such occasions as this joy
in the unexpected kindness of fate—the rule must be suspended.

"How long it’s been!" he said in a low voice.  "Not since early
September have I kissed you—and this is almost February."

She glanced warningly toward the top of the partition.

"Away at the other end," Basil assured her, "and doing something that
can’t be left an instant for an hour or more."

"Well then—"  She blushed, hesitated, gave him a passionate, longing
look.  "One more kiss—and we go to work."

He seated himself and drew her to his lap.  With their heads close
together, they talked—of anything, of everything, of nothing—and hardly
knew what they were saying—and cared not at all.  "Oh, the happiness of
it," she murmured.  "And we are to work side by side, too.  It seems a
dream.  I can’t believe it."

"And soon it will be spring again, and we shall be a little freer."

"Be patient until I get everything settled," she answered, "and we shall
be free almost all the time.  I have thought it out."

"You think of everything."

"I think of nothing but you—always you," she answered.  "What have I but
our love?  I want to make the house comfortable, your apartment
comfortable, myself attractive—all, so that love will never begin to
think of taking flight."

"Flight!"  He laughed softly.  "How absurd!  Can’t you feel that I’m
just wrapped up in you?"

She touched his tight encircling arms.  "I can feel that I’m just
wrapped up in you," she retorted.  "Now, let me go.  I am not to keep
you from the work—or you me."

"Not just yet."

"Yes"—firmly.  "You don’t take me any more seriously than Richard does.
But I don’t in the least care. If I am serious, what does it matter
whether anyone thinks so or not?"  She laughed a little.  "And I’m
feminine enough, I’ll admit, to want to be what the man who wants me
wants me to be."

He was not listening.  He held her more tightly, and she knew what was
coming before he began to speak. "Let me come to-night, Courtney.  Just
this once.  I simply want to be alone with you——"

"Not yet," she replied.  "Don’t let’s tempt each other to risk years of
happiness for a frightened moment."  And, afraid she would yield if he
kept on urging, she abruptly freed herself and sent him back to his
seat.

An hour, and he came to her again.  "I’ve been doing nothing but watch
you, and you haven’t looked round once."

"This work is interesting," replied she—and it was the simple truth.

"No—not once!"

"What a good example I’m setting you.  I always used to like chemistry.
And I was a harum-scarum girl then.  Now, I see I’m going to be
tremendously fond of it."

"Courtney—I can’t stand—our—our compact.  I simply can’t.  I feel as if
you had thrust me out of your life. And—  Have you no memory,
sweetheart?  Courtney, we’re only human beings, after all.  And we’ve
the right. Aren’t you my wife?"

"Don’t tempt me, Basil," she answered with a sigh. "Do you suppose I
don’t feel it?  Sometimes I get to thinking what might be—  But I will
not!  You do not wish it."  And she glanced meaningly at the partition.

"You are mine!" he whispered, moved by the reminder but not abashed.
"If I had never known love in its fullness, I might be able to endure
this cold, repellent pretense of virtue—for, it’s nothing but a flimsy
pretense. Courtney, if you love me——"

"Is your love only—_that_!"

"If you loved me," he repeated, "you’d not calculate so puritanically.
If I weren’t seeing you, dear, I could bear it.  But seeing you all the
time—touching you—kissing you—Courtney, Courtney, how can you make me,
and yourself too, suffer so needlessly?  If you really love, how can you
keep me out of your inmost life—as if I were not everything to you?"

"I explained to you——"

"Explained!  Explained!" he said, impatiently.  "We explain and explain,
but it’s all sophistry.  The truth is—what?  That we are lovers.  And,
if our love is a sin, why not take all its reward since we’ll have to
take all its punishment?"

"Don’t harass me now," she begged, agitated and trembling.

"Harass you!"  He drew away offendedly.  "I thought I was pleading for
you, as well as for myself. If I am not, please forget what I said."

"I didn’t mean that!"

"Then I may come to-night—or you to me?"

She gave him a sad, pleading look.  "Not to-night, dear.  Not just yet.
We _must_ wait till things are going quietly in a routine."

"How easily you put us off!"

"Basil!—_Please_!"

He stared sulkily out of the window.  "It does sting my pride that you
care so much less than I.  It does make me—almost doubt."

"Not so loud!"

"You don’t realize how far away he is, and how absorbed....  I take back
all I said."  And he straightened himself coldly and went to his own
part of the room.

A moment, and she followed him.  "You are offended, Basil."

"No—hurt."

She sighed.  "I will come to-night."

"You do not wish to come!"

"To be honest, no.  I should feel—"  She hesitated. She wished to be
frank; but how could she be, when he was in that mood of doubt?  How
could she explain again that, in some respects, she loathed the memory
of the times they had been stealthily together—the alarms, the narrow
escapes from discovery—the commonness of it all—like those low intrigues
that get into the newspapers, to make coarse mouths water and vulgar
eyes sparkle?  If she tried to tell him, he would misunderstand.  "Not
just yet," she went on.  "I’m in a queer mood—not myself.  You——"

She was so tender, so loving, so deeply distressed that, in shame and
contrition, he embraced her.  "I’m sorry I said anything.  But you’ll
understand.  How can I help longing for you?  It’s your own fault—you
beautiful, wonderful _woman_!"

And their first clash ended in kisses, in serenity restored, with him
saying—and thinking—"How much braver and better you are than I!  Yours
is the love that makes a man stronger and decenter."

Her look was eloquent of gratitude and happiness.  But the happiness in
it was forced, at least in part, was rather what she felt she ought to
feel than what she actually did feel—as is so often the case.  And she
went back to work with a certain heaviness of heart—and a foreboding.
The slightest alarm, however fanciful, was enough to call up the specter
of those months of loneliness and despair after he left.  That specter
haunted her, was in her mind the fixed idea that becomes an obsession.
She knew that to quiet it, she would if necessary stop at nothing.  "I
can never give him up again.  I’d do anything—anything—rather than even
risk it."  Pride and self-respect were all very well, but those who
could put such things before love had not loved.  She hoped and prayed
Basil would not force her to the test.  But—if he did—  She sighed, and
bade herself wait until that situation arose before worrying over it.




                                 *XIX*


Now that the throes of birth were over, their love bade fair to be like
those robust infants that almost kill mothers in the bearing but
thereafter give not a moment’s anxiety. Outdoors it was rivalling the
previous winter; indoors—at the house and at the laboratory—there
reigned mid-summer serenity.  Nanny—always a shadow, though very faint
indeed latterly—had yielded before her arch enemy, rheumatism, had been
pensioned off, had gone to her brother’s, seventeen miles into the
wilderness.  She would shadow them no more.  Richard had come to another
crisis in his researches; and a mind in the act of gestation is like a
hen on eggs—solitary, brooding, best left utterly alone. He was as
unconscious of Courtney and Basil as of himself; all three were, for
him, simply instruments to the strange and terrible marvels of chemical
action that were unfolding.  Soon Basil felt about him as did
Courtney—that is, lost all sense of his being related to her or to the
life of the household.  As they held to their compact, they experienced
none of passion’s inevitable alternations of rapture and revulsion.
Habit is equally the friend of virtue and of vice.  It was not a matter
of months but of weeks when they were looking on their love as not only
moral but even exalted, since they were self-restrained.

The chief factor in the tranquillity was the work. Courtney began at the
laboratory solely that she and Basil might be together.  Soon she had
another reason—love of the work itself.  Everything worth while, whether
for achievement or for amusement, involves drudgery at the outset—tennis
or bridge no less than a trade or an art. Although Courtney had done at
school the worst part of the drudgery in acquiring chemistry, it was
nearly a month before she began to enjoy.  Then came the first haunting
alluring glimpses of the elusive mystery which makes chemistry the most
fascinating of the sciences; and from that hour forth she forgot the
difficulties in the delights. She often stole in to gaze longingly at
Richard’s work—for, he kept the main part of the great task of finding a
new and universal fuel altogether in his own hands and used the other
two as mere helpers.  She would have liked to work with him; and, as she
understood better and better what he was about, the temptation to try to
bring her skill and her knowledge to his attention became strong at
times. But she was afraid that if he began to think attentively about
her being there, he would send her away.  No, it was best to remain
hidden behind Basil, to do nothing to remind Richard of her existence.

At first Basil assumed she was toiling like another Richard because she
wished quickly to get knowledge enough to make plausible her necessary
pretense of interest. But after a few weeks he saw she was in earnest,
or thought she was—for, he could not believe one so pretty, so charming,
so light of spirit and of mind, could be deeply in earnest about such a
heavy, unwomanly matter as chemistry—or about anything else, except of
course love.  He was fond of chemistry; but it was in the fashion of
most men’s fondness for serious effort—to get excuse and appetite for
idling.  However, partly through pride, partly because her enthusiasm
was contagious, he buckled to and worked as Richard had never been able
to make him.

"Really, you needn’t crowd yourself quite so hard," said he to Courtney,
when his own energy began to flag.

"I’ve got to choose between being a drag and a help. Besides—" She
glanced down with the shy, subtle smile he had learned to recognize as a
cover for something she meant very much indeed—"don’t you find that
being occupied is a great aid?"

"I’d not have thought it possible to live as we’re living—and be happy."

"You are happy?"  As she asked this, she scrutinized his face in woman’s
familiar veiled fashion.  She was always watching, watching, for the
first faint dreaded sign of discontent.

"So much so," answered he, earnestly, "that I’d be afraid to change
anything."

She saw that he meant it, that he felt it with all the intensity of the
fine side of his nature.  And she breathed a secret sigh of relief.  She
said: "Every day—time and again—I say to myself, ’If only this will
last!’"

"It will!" declared he.

And, pessimist though she had been made by disappointment on
disappointment in small things and large her whole life through, she
began to hope that this would last, that the worst of her life was
perhaps over, that her life problem was settling and settling right.
The watchdogs of presentiment are like their much overrated animal
prototypes.  They bark at everything, that they may get credit for
usefulness if by chance they once do happen to vent their nerve-racking
warnings in advance of a real peril.  Even presentiment called its dogs
off duty.

She had been brought up among people who imagine they see the operations
of natural law in the artificial conventions of morality that differ for
every age and race and creed, really for every individual.  She had long
discarded as superstition the creed of her parents; but she had not been
able wholly to uproot all the ramifications of beliefs dependent upon
that creed for vitality.  Thus, she vaguely felt a relationship of
effect and cause between her sufferings in the autumn and early winter
and those fear-shadowed, shame-alloyed but ecstatic moments of joy in
the summer.  And in the same vague way, there seemed to her some sort of
connection between their present happiness and their self-restraint.
She would have, quite honestly, denied, had she been accused of
harboring such a "remnant of superstition."  Nevertheless, it was the
fact. However, she did not analyze or reason about her happiness. She
simply accepted and enjoyed it—and forgot the foundations on which it
rested.

And the days—the long, long days that only people who live in quiet
places have—moved tranquilly and happily by, swift yet slow.  The weeks
seemed to be flying, and the days went very fast; but each hour
presented its full quota of sixty minutes for enjoyment.  In those
dreadful days of the previous fall she had wished every hour that she
was living in a city, because in the city a thousand resolute intrusions
compel distraction, make the moments seem to fly, whether the heart is
heavy or light.  Now, she was glad with all her heart that she was
living and loving where there were no distractions, where each moment
could be lived as a connoisseur drinks his glass of rare old wine drop
by drop.


One day late in April she and Richard, it so happened, were alone for a
few minutes before supper.  He abruptly emerged from his abstraction to
say, "Basil and Helen are getting on famously."

She startled, then lapsed into her usual isolation when alone with him.

"I expect there’ll be a marriage before the summer is out."

"Yes?" said Courtney, absently.

"Well, it’s a good match.  They’re both comfortably shallow.  They’re
fond of the same kind of harmless pretenses.  They look well
together....  I hope they’ll stay on with us—at least until the first
baby comes."

She shivered, rose abruptly.  "Supper must certainly be ready," said
she.

"Then," pursued Dick, intent upon his train of thought, "they might get
the Donaldson place.  The Donaldsons want to sell."

She smiled ironically.  "I suppose you’ve spoken to Donaldson about it."

"Not yet.  But next time I see him, I’ll give him a hint.  He might sell
to some one else."

Basil now came in.  "Sell what?" he asked, to join in the conversation.

"Oh, nothing," answered Dick.  "Courtney and I were discussing the
Donaldson place.  Donaldson wants to sell, and we thought we might get
neighbors we didn’t like."

"Richard suggested," said Courtney, in her most innocent manner, "that
you might buy it."

Dick looked alarmed.  Basil, with his eyes on Courtney, promptly said:
"Maybe I will.  It’s second only to this place.  And I shall always live
here."

"Richard thought it would be a good idea for you to settle there when
you and Helen marry," said Courtney, with a smile only Basil could
understand.

If anything, Basil looked more confused and nervous than did Richard; he
laughed hysterically.  "Really—really—that’s very attractive—if—" he
stammered.

Just then Helen, out of hearing on the lake-front veranda, happened to
call, "Oh, Mr. Gallatin!"

"Yes," he answered, and hastened out to join her. Richard stared
helplessly at his wife.  "Now, why did you do that?" he demanded.

"What?"

"You certainly are the most thoughtless, frivolous person!  I never knew
you to be serious about anything—except something that was of not the
least importance.  I must remember to be always on guard when I speak
before you."

"Yes, you ought to be careful.  I’m not intellectual, like Helen.  But I
was forgetting; now you say she’s shallow, too."

"All intellectual women are shallow," said Dick.  He was ashamed of his
heat of the moment before.  "And I never said you were shallow.  You
ought to be glad you have no intellectual tendencies, but are a bundle
of instincts and impulses, as a woman should be.  I guess you didn’t
spill the milk, after all.  If Gallatin loves Helen, a little break such
as you made won’t scare him off."

"No indeed.  When a man’s in love, the sight of the net doesn’t frighten
him.  He helps to hold it open so that he can jump in deep."

Courtney intended to tease Basil, the next time they were alone.  But it
slipped her mind until nearly a week later.  Basil had got into the
habit of going out for a stroll and a smoke every morning about ten.
She never went with him, because she did not wish to interrupt her work
to which she could give only the mornings, as the time for gardens and
growing things was at hand.  One morning it so chanced that her task of
the moment was just finished when Basil moved toward the door.  "I’ll go
with you," said she.

He hesitated, looked disconcerted.

"Oh, if you don’t want me," laughed she.

"Indeed I do," he hastened to say.  "Only—usually you don’t."

They went out together, walked up and down the wide retaining wall of
the lake, beyond the Smoke House. Presently Helen appeared, on her way
to the apartment over the laboratory.  Now that she had charge of the
housekeeping, it was part of her duties to look at the apartment and see
that Lizzie was keeping things clean and was making Gallatin
comfortable.  At sight of Basil and Courtney, she stopped short, colored
painfully.  She answered their greetings with embarrassment, went with
awkward haste in at the apartment entrance.

"Helen’s extremely shy," said Courtney.

"She _is_ difficult to get acquainted with," replied Basil. His manner
might have been either absent or constrained.

"I’m afraid I haven’t given you much chance," said Courtney, merely by
way of saying something.

"Oh, I know her pretty well," Basil hastened to protest. "There’s a lot
more to her than one sees at first."

"Indeed there is," said Courtney, warmly.  "I’ve grown very fond of
her—fonder than I ever thought I could be of another woman.  I don’t
care much for women. They’re so small toward each other—because they’re
all brought up to be cutthroat rivals in the same low
business—husband-catching.  But Helen isn’t a bit small. She has a real
heart."

"And real intellect, too."

Courtney’s smile was absolutely free from malice. "That’s just what she
has not," she replied, for she talked with perfect frankness to him, her
other self.  "I suppose the man never lived who could judge a
good-looking woman.  Women don’t always misjudge men.  But men always
fancy beauty means brains, if the woman’s heavy and serious—and not
downright imbecile."

"I shouldn’t call Miss March imbecile," said he.  "Or even heavy."

"Now don’t be cross because I hinted that women could fool you," teased
Courtney.  "And I didn’t mean to suggest that Helen is imbecile or
heavy."

"She knows an awful lot," said Basil.  "She often corrects me—in little
slips about authors and poetry, and so on."

Courtney could hardly keep from showing her amusement that Basil should
be impressed by what was really one of Helen’s weaknesses.  For Helen,
like so many who have small or very imperfect knowledge, attached as
great importance to trifles of worthless learning as a college
professor; she became agitated if anyone showed lack of knowledge of
some infinitesimal in etiquette or grammar or what not, just as
fashionable people sweat with mortification or distend with vast inward
derision if some one, however intelligent, however capable, appears
among them in an out-of-style garment or uses an expression not in their
tiny vocabulary.  Courtney was striving tactfully to open out a less
ignorant point of view to Helen. And here was Basil showing that Helen’s
weakness was in reality a strength, highly useful in dealing with men.

Courtney said: "Helen is a fine, sensible, capable girl—about the finest
I ever knew.  And she has genuine sweetness and good taste."

"She does dress well," said Basil warmly.  "If she had the means, she’d
be stunning."

"Could be, but wouldn’t be," replied Courtney, perfectly just and good
humored, but perhaps a little weary of hearing another young woman’s
praises in her lover’s voice.  "She’d ’settle down’ if she married.
She’s resolutely old fashioned—hates to think or to exert herself.
She’ll make a fine, old-fashioned wife for some man who likes to be
mildly bored at home and wants his fun elsewhere.  This reminds me.
Richard has you and her married—wedding in the fall—baby next spring."

Basil flushed at this teasing.

"You don’t seem enthusiastic."

"I don’t care to hear a good young girl spoken of so lightly," said he,
with some stiffness.

And now Courtney colored.  After a moment she said, apologetic without
knowing why: "Perhaps I shouldn’t have done it.  But I always feel free
to speak out to you any stray thought that drifts into my head—without
choosing my words."

Helen now reappeared, cast a peculiar glance in their direction, blushed
rosily, hastened away toward the house. "She’d better be careful how she
blushes at sight of you," said Courtney smiling, "or you’ll be thinking
she’s in love with you."

"Nonsense!" protested Basil, again unaccountably irritated.

"How solemn you are to-day, dear.  And, why shouldn’t she fall in love
with you?  I can see how a woman might."

He did not respond to her glance.  He stared straight ahead, answered
awkwardly, "Helen and I are simply good friends."

The phrase jarred upon her a little.  "Simply good friends."  As she
repeated it, she remembered suddenly, vividly, the beginning of their
own love.  They too had been "simply good friends."  The phrase kept
recurring to her, dinning disagreeably in her ears.  She frowned on
herself; she laughed at herself.  But it continued to ring and to jar.
"I certainly have a nasty jealous streak hidden away in my disposition,"
she said to herself.  "I mustn’t encourage it."

During the next few days every time Helen and Basil were together, she
caught herself watching them for signs—"Signs of what?" she demanded of
herself.  But in spite of herself she kept on watching.  That specter of
the dreadful days without him—that specter so easily called up—began to
glide about in the background of her thoughts, rousing those fears
before which she was abject coward.

Helen had the young girl’s usual assortment of harmless little tricks.
Her favorite was to note when a man made a remark which she thought he
regarded as clever, to go back to it after a moment or so, and repeat it
and laugh or admire according as it had been intended to be amusing or
profound.  She was constantly doing this—with Richard, with Basil, with
every man she met.  The time came when the overworked trick began to get
upon Courtney’s nerves, especially as Helen, being entirely without
humor and a close-to-shore wader in the waters of thought, was not
always happy in her selection of the remark.  Still, her intentions
being of the best, Courtney endured; and at times she got not a little
secret amusement from seeing how Basil and even Richard were flattered
by the trick, never suspecting, even after Helen had again and again
laughed or admired effusively in quite the wrong place.  As she watched
Helen and Basil now, the only "sign" she saw was this clever-stupid
subtlety of Helen’s for flattering male vanity—Helen practicing it on
Basil, Basil purring each time like a cat under the stroking of an
agreeable hand.  This certainly was not serious. She laughed at herself
with a reproachful "You don’t deserve happiness—trying to poison it with
contemptible suspicion."  And the specter faded, and she no longer heard
the sound of rain beating, of rain drizzling, of rain dripping through
days and nights of aloneness and despair.


Spring was smiling from every twig.  The birds, impatient at winter’s
reluctant leave-taking, had arrived before the young leaves were far
enough advanced to cover them.  So, every tree was alive with them,
plainly in view, boldly about their courting and nesting, like lovers
who, despairing of finding a quiet place, march along the highway
embracing in defiance of curious eyes.  One morning, half an hour after
Basil went out for his habitual stroll and cigarette, Courtney changed
her mind and decided to join him.  She looked along the retaining wall.
No Basil. She walked up and down, noting, and feeling in her own blood,
the agitations of the mightiest force in the universe—those agitations
that in the springtime set all nature to quivering.  Ten minutes
passed—fifteen—half an hour—nearly three quarters of an hour.  Still no
Basil.  She decided he must have gone up to his rooms and fallen asleep.
She resisted the temptation to go and waken him, and went slowly toward
the laboratory doors.  Just as she was about to jump from the wall, out
of the apartment entrance came Helen, her face aglow, her eyes
sparkling, all the austerity gone from her regular features.  "How
pretty she looks," thought Courtney.  "I wonder what’s delighting her
so.  One’d think she was in love and was loved.  There never lived a
sweeter, more unselfish girl. Nothing petty in her.  She even has a nice
way of being prudent about money."

Helen did not see her, went quickly up the path and into the wood
between the Smoke House and the lawns round the house.  Courtney
resisted the impulse to call because she had already been out of the
laboratory too long.  As Helen disappeared among the trees, Courtney was
astounded to see appear at the apartment door—Basil! On his face a
contented pleased expression, as if he were reflecting upon something
highly agreeable—Helen’s face—his face—Courtney stood for an instant
like a flaming torch planted upon that wall—a torch with a white-hot
flame of hate.

As Basil was taking a last puff at his cigarette, she darted into the
laboratory and sat at her case.  When he entered, she was just where she
had been at his going out. "Still at work!" he cried.

"Still at work!" said she.  She forced her lips to smile, but she did
not dare lift her fluttering eyelids.  She looked calm and, as always,
sweet; but in those few minutes all the sweetness of her nature had
transformed, as the thunderstorm changes milk from food to poison.  And
the remembered horror of those days of desolation goaded her toward a
very insanity of fear and jealousy.  That smile on Helen’s face—then on
his.

He stood behind her.  If she had had a knife she would have whirled
round and plunged it into his breast and then into her own.  But she had
not; also, this was twentieth-century and conventional life.  She sat
rigid, intent upon the flame of the blast tube she was using.

He bent and kissed her neck.  "Sweetheart!" he murmured.

The fixed smile became a distortion, as she lowered her head.

"The spring—outdoors," he went on in the same low caressing voice.
"It’s hard to bear.  It seems so long—so long—since—"  His pause
finished the sentence better than any words.

Long indeed, thought she; a singularly patient and restrained lover;
strangely respectful.

"There are more kinds of happiness in love than I imagined," he went on.
"But do you never—never——"

"Please," she interrupted.  She found her voice could be trusted; she
ventured to test her eyes.  She looked up at him, taking pleasure in
veiling her hate behind a smile. She strove to make the smile sweet and
tender.  She felt that she was succeeding.  "How homely he is," she
thought.  "And I love him—ugly and a traitor.  I love him, and I’ll keep
on loving him—for, he’s all there is between me and misery."

Richard called them into the front compartment, and the three worked
together at the big retort the rest of the morning.  It was a strange
hour and a half.  She seemed to be two distinct persons—no, three.  One
was hating Basil and Helen—a being that seemed to concentrate all that
is venomous and malignant.  One was watching with interest and
excitement the awful processes by which calm liquids poured together
suddenly became violent, colorless liquids a marvelous radiance of
exquisite color, heat became infinite cold and cold became heat that
consumed hard metals as if they were bits of fluff.  The third
personality within her was aloof and calm, and watched her other two and
wondered at them.

At dinner time she and Richard walked to the house together, Basil
stopping at the apartment to tidy himself, as usual.  "Well, how do you
think they are getting on?" she asked carelessly.

"I can’t tell," replied Richard, "till I’ve got several other
reactions."

"Helen and Basil, I mean."

"How should I know?  All right, I suppose."

"Didn’t you tell me, a week or so ago, you thought it was a match?"

"Of course it’s a match," said he, as if there weren’t a doubt about it.

She quivered at this pressure upon the thorn that was pricking and
festering.  "Why are you so positive?" she asked.

"You know as much as I do.  He goes out to meet her every morning,
doesn’t he?"

Every morning!  To smoke!  In a series of internal explosions whose
flames scorched her soul she traced the progress of that smoking habit
of his.  With an outer calmness that amazed her she pursued her
inquiries.  "Are they—affectionate when they’re alone?" she asked.

"How?"  Richard’s mind was back at his experiments.

She repeated her question in a voice that was under still better
control.

"I’ve never seen them but once—one day when he was helping her balance
herself at the edge of the wall—she was pretending to look down into the
water at something—the old trick."

Courtney laughed.  "The old trick—yes."  She laughed again.

"It’s all settled, no doubt," declared Richard.  "And good business!"

Courtney hurled a glance of fury at him.  "Unless he’s making a fool of
her."

"Oh—absurd.  He’s a gentleman."

"Gentleman.  That sounds as if it meant a lot, but does it?"

Richard wished to think of his work uninterrupted by this trifle of a
love affair.  "Why not ask her about it? She’s no doubt dying to tell—if
you give her the excuse of opening the subject."

Courtney went up to her balcony, seated herself in a rocking-chair.  She
rocked and thought, thought, thought—getting nowhere, motion without
progress, like that of her chair.  She did all the talking at dinner
that day.  She took the relations of men and women for her subject and
shot arrows of wit at it.  As Winchie was having dinner next door with
the Donaldson children, she did not need to restrain herself.  She was
mocking, cynical, audacious. Basil stopped laughing and stared at his
plate.  Helen, all blushes, looked as if she would sink under the table.
Richard remained calm—he was not hearing a word.  Basil’s gloom and
Helen’s shocked modesty delighted Courtney, edged her on to further
audacities.  She looked from one to the other, smiling, jeering at
them—and she rattled on and on, because she felt that if she stopped
scoffing and laughing, she would spring at him or at her.  She had the
longing to do physical violence, like one in the torment of a toothache.

Richard and Basil had not been gone many minutes before she began on the
unconscious Helen.  A sigh gave her the opening.  "Unhappy?" she said.

"No, indeed," answered Helen.  "If anything, too happy.  You know what
this life here means to me."

"But you must find it lonely."

"Lonely!  Not for an instant."

"We’ve had almost no company this winter and spring. I must hunt up some
young men for you."

"I don’t want them, as I’ve often told you."  Courtney remembered that
she had, and muttered, "What a blind fool I’ve been."  Helen went
sweetly on: "Beside such men as Richard and Mr. Gallatin, the ordinary
young man is anything but interesting."

"Still, you must marry.  And you’ve got the looks to make a first-rate
bargain."

Helen looked gently disapproving of this frank mode of stating the case.
"I could never marry for anything but love."

"Of course.  But, being a well-brought-up woman, you’ll not have
difficulty in loving any proper candidate."

"I’m well content."

Courtney bent low over the scarlet and pink and white tulips in one of
the window boxes.  Content!  This woman who was stealing her lover—this
woman who was thrusting her back into the despair of those loveless,
hopeless days when Basil was gone and the icy rains poured on and on
upon her desolate life!  She controlled herself, repeated vaguely:
"Content?  Impossible unless you’ve got your eye on a likely man.  No
single woman ever was since the world began."

Helen blushed consciously.

"Who is he?" teased Courtney.  She had seen the blush, and her nerves
were twitching.  "Who is it?" she repeated softly.  "Basil?"

The blush deepened.

"I thought so!" exclaimed Courtney with laughing triumph.  "You’ve
yielded to his fascinations, have you?"

Helen paled and her lip trembled.  "Please don’t," she faltered.  "Don’t
joke me about—about him."

Courtney turned hastily away to hide the devil that gleamed from her
eyes; for she felt that her worst suspicions were confirmed.  "Tell me,"
she said, as soon as she could find voice, and could make that voice gay
with good-humored raillery, "how long has this—this idyll been going
on?"

"Really—you’re quite mistaken, dear," pleaded Helen.

"How long have you and he been keeping those trysts?"

"You’re quite wrong.  We’ve met by accident," protested Helen.  "We just
happen to meet."  She hung her head.  "I’ll admit I—I arrange to go to
look at the apartment about the time I know he comes out to smoke."

Courtney was all smiles.  "And he arranges to come out to smoke about
the time he knows you’re going to the apartment.  How—delicious!"

"Do you think he does it deliberately?" inquired Helen eagerly.

Courtney was amazed at the girl’s skill in duplicity. She began to
wonder how far they had gone.  But her face was bright and innocent as a
poison locust bloom when she said: "You sly child!  What were you and he
doing in his apartment to-day?"

"Oh!" cried Helen, covering her face with her hands.

Courtney’s features were distorted with fear and fury; the specter was
stalking and leering.  But her voice sounded soft and seductive as she
urged: "Go on, dear.  You needn’t be afraid to tell me—everything."

Helen lifted her flaming face.  "There’s nothing to tell," cried she.
"When you asked me that question, something in your tone made me feel as
if I had done a—a wickedly indiscreet thing.  But it was all so harmless
and accidental.  I came earlier than usual, and he was getting the
cigarette case he’d forgotten."

"Highly probable!" exclaimed Courtney, apparently much amused.  "And so,
you could make love to each other at your ease."

"Courtney!"  Helen started up, horror-stricken.  "Can you think I’d let
him lay the weight of his finger on me?"  And she burst into tears.
"Oh, _what_ have I done!" she sobbed.  "And it seemed perfectly
innocent."

Insane with jealousy though she was, Courtney could not but be
convinced.  "Don’t take it so to heart, my dear," said she.  "Tell me
all about it."

"And you could suspect me!  But I deserve it.  If I’d been really a good
woman, I’d not have thought of him until he had spoken to me."

"Dry your eyes," said Courtney, calm and practical. "How far has this
gone?"

"Not at all," declared Helen.  "We’ve never said a word of love to each
other."

"Is that the truth?"

"As God is my judge."

"Not a kiss—no hand-holding?"

"Nothing."

"Only looks?"

"Sometimes—I’ve hoped—from the way he looked—"  She sighed.  "But I’m
afraid he meant nothing."

Courtney studied her ingenuous face as a bank teller a note that is
under suspicion of being counterfeit. Yes—Helen was telling the truth.

"Do you think he cares?" asked Helen wistfully.  "He seems to like to
talk with me.  And he’s very eloquent about sentimental things.  He
talks and he acts like a man in love.  But—at times I feel as if it were
with another woman."

Courtney buried her face in the urn of violets.  And next to her feeling
of enormous relief at the clearing of Basil from the worst charge
against him was gratitude that she would not have to try to play the
tyrant—try to send Helen away.

"It may be some bad woman’s gotten hold of him," continued the girl
reflectively.  "He may be chained by a love he’s ashamed of."

"That sounds like a weekly story paper."

"I know there’s _some_ weight on his conscience," maintained Helen.

Courtney looked strangely at her and laughed.  "When people look and
talk remorse, they’re only boasting.  He’s trying to make himself
interesting, my dear.  He wants to thrill you with the story of his
life—some commonplace adventure he exaggerates into an epic drama."  She
laughed again, most unpleasantly.  "Heaven deliver me from these ’My
God!  How she loves me’ men!"

"He’s not like that—not at all," protested Helen. "But—oh, I wish I knew
whether he cared for me.  I don’t know _what_ to do!  I’ve given him
every opportunity—"  She stopped short with such an expression of horror
at her slip that Courtney laughed outright.  "I don’t mean I’ve done
anything forward or unladylike—" stammered Helen.

"He’s a man of the world."  She pinched Helen’s cheek. "He reads that
innocent little mind of yours like an electric sign."

Helen was hysterical with dismay.  "You think he’s laughing at me?"

"And getting ready to—to amuse himself."

"Courtney!"

Courtney nodded and smiled.

"He never could think so lightly of me.  Never!"

"Lightly?  He sees you are in love with him.  Why should he suspect you
of being calculating?"

"Calculating?  I don’t understand."

"Unwilling to give except for an annuity—for life support."

Helen’s honest brown eyes were big and round.  "What do you mean?"

"What I say," was Courtney’s reply.  And in a, to Helen, appallingly
matter-of-fact way, she went on to explain.  "And what I say is simply
the sense under all the nonsense about marrying.  You want to marry,
don’t you? You’re looking about for somebody to support you and your
children, aren’t you?  You say you love our homely, fascinating,
well-to-do friend Gallatin.  But not enough to go very far unless he’d
sign a life contract.  Didn’t I hear you say one day that you didn’t
think it proper for people even to kiss until the preacher had dropped
the flag?"

Helen gazed at her with an expression of sheer horrified amazement that
delighted her.  "How can as sweet and pure a woman as you talk that
way?"

Courtney laughed gayly.  "Because she’s neither sweet nor pure.  Because
she’s got intelligence and experience. I just wanted to show you that
while you were pretending to think about love—ideal, romantic, unselfish
love, you were really planning for food, clothing and shelter."

"But I don’t want to hear such talk!" cried Helen. "If I’m deluded, why,
let me stay so.  You are so frivolous, Courtney!  Don’t you believe in
love at all?"

Courtney reflected.  "I don’t know whether I do or not," she finally
said.

Helen looked at her with sad sympathy.  "And I thought you were happy!"
she sighed.

"I am," rejoined Courtney.  "And I purpose to remain so."

"But you are worried about me?  You think Bas—Mr. Gallatin is not a fit
man for me to marry?"  The tone betrayed her anxiety, the importance she
attached to Courtney’s judgment; for, while Helen’s conventional mind
told her that Courtney was a "light-weight," like all lively, laughing
persons, her instinct made her always consult her before acting in any
matter from a man to what hat to wear with what dress.  "You think
he’s—not nice?"

Courtney felt Helen’s nearly breathless expectation; she did not answer
immediately.  When she did it was from the farther side of the room,
with her attention apparently on a window garden of hyacinths.  "Be
careful, my dear. Remember, your primness is your chief asset.  If he
thought—or hoped—you were—loose——"

"Loose!"  Helen trembled, looked as if she were about to faint.

"It’s ridiculous the way we women exaggerate the value of our favors,"
philosophized Courtney.

"I wish you wouldn’t make that kind of—of jests, dear," pleaded Helen.
"I know you don’t mean a word of it.  You feel just as I do—that a man
couldn’t do enough to repay any good woman for giving herself to him."

"Or a woman do enough to repay a man for giving himself to her,"
retorted Courtney.  "The account’s even, or the whole thing’s too low to
talk about.  Still—you don’t understand—you can’t.  And so long as men
think a woman the grander the more conceited and selfish she is, you’re
as well off, believing as you do....  As to Gallatin——"

"I don’t care anything about him!" cried Helen. "What you’ve been saying
has given me such a shock."  She paused, then went on in a low, awful
tone, "Courtney, I must tell you that I was alone with him in his
sitting room for over an hour!"

"When?" asked Courtney, sharply.

"To-day—what we were talking about."

"_Only_ to-day?"

"Never before!" exclaimed Helen.  "And never again."

"Then—perhaps—only perhaps, mind you," mocked Courtney, "I’ll put off
speaking to Richard about it—and writing Mrs. Torrey."

Helen could not see any humor in the situation.  "Do you honestly
believe, Courtney," she asked in deep distress, "that he could have
thought of me as if I were—were a—a—_bad_ woman?"

Courtney’s eyes were most unpleasant.

"I see you’re disgusted and angry with me, dear," said Helen, in tears
again.  "I know it was unwomanly of me to think of him when he’d said
nothing.  But I—I couldn’t help it.  I _will_ help it, though!"

"You think you can?"

Helen showed she was astonished and hurt.  "Do you imagine _I_ could
care for a man whose way of caring for me was an insult?"

Courtney counseled with a vase of jonquils.  "No, I suppose _you_
couldn’t," she replied.  "You don’t know about wild, free—_fierce_—love—
Do you?"

Helen’s expression was of one appalled.  "How can you talk that way?"
she asked.  "You’re very strange to-day.  You’re not at all yourself."

"Self!" exclaimed Courtney, scornfully.  "What is my self?  What is your
self?  What is anybody’s self?"

She no longer had the delusion of free will that makes us talk about
bettering the race by "changing human nature from within"—the delusion
that the individual is responsible, though obviously the social system
and the other compelling external conditions move the individual as the
showman his puppet.  She, helpless in the whirl of strong emotions, was
beginning to understand why, at the outset of her married life, instinct
had bade her arrange all the circumstances round her and Richard so that
they would be compelled to live the life in common, the life of the
single common interest that holds love captive as the cage the bird. She
was beginning to realize how like water self is in the grip of
circumstances—how self is mill pond or torrent, pure or foul, or mixture
of the two, according as circumstance commands.  These demon
impulses—they were not her self. Self was amazed onlooker at its own
strange doings—was like helpless occupant of the carriage behind the
runaway team.

When Helen spoke again, she showed that her thoughts were still
lingering longingly where they must not, if Courtney was to be rid of
the demons.  "But if a man loves a woman," said Helen, "why shouldn’t he
be glad to give her honorable marriage?"

Courtney hesitated, dared.  "She might be already married."

"Courtney!"  And her horrified eyes told Courtney she had caught the
intended hint that Basil was in love with some married woman.  "It isn’t
possible!"

"Haven’t such things happened?"

"Yes—but—  No married woman a nice man would notice would ever think of
another man than her husband."

"I don’t know about a ’nice’ woman," said Courtney, slowly.  "But I can
imagine that a _human_ woman—if her husband neglected her, and chilled
and killed her love——"

Helen was not listening, was not aware that she had interrupted as she
said, "Do you think Mr. Gallatin could be in love with some married
woman—of—of our class?"

"I suspect so," replied Courtney, gazing calmly into her eyes.

"I’ll not believe it!" cried Helen.  "I’ll not believe it!"

"You’re like all girls.  Because your own head’s full of marriage, you
think every man who’s polite to you, or flirts a little to make the time
pass more agreeably, is about to send for the preacher.  Now, frankly,
has Basil ever made love to you?"

"No," admitted Helen.  "But—"  She halted.

"But what?" came from Courtney sharp and arresting as a shot.

"I _feel_ he is fond of me," confessed Helen.

Courtney laughed harshly.  "All men are fond of all good-looking
women—especially in the spring.  Don’t be a fool, Helen."

"But a married woman has no right to him!"

Courtney flushed, and her eyes flashed.  "And how do you know?  And what
right have you to judge?  Are you God?"

"No, but——"

"No!" cried Courtney.  "How do you know what he—his love may mean to
her?  How do you know but what it may be the one thing between her and
despair and ruin? You, with your timid, proper calculating little love!
Why, if the woman cared enough for him—needed him so—that she sacrificed
self-respect—honor—truth—all—all—for love—what could you give him to
replace it?  And what are your needs beside hers?"

Helen’s face grew hard as these words that outraged every principle of
her training poured recklessly from Courtney’s lips.  "I’m astounded at
your defending a bad woman," she said.  "You’re _too_ generous,
Courtney.  You’d feel differently if she were taking Richard away from
you. But, I’m not in love with Basil.  I see you know things about him.
I—I—despise him.  I pity him, of course, for he might have been a nice
man.  But I couldn’t love him. I’m glad you told me.  I might have
engaged myself to him."

Courtney’s far from sane eyes twinkled at that last ingenuous bit of
maidenly vanity.  Helen went about her work, and she departed to the
greenhouse.  "She’ll stop loving him as easily as she began," said she
to herself. "What does her sort of women know about love?  They’re
faithful to whatever man they marry, as a dog’s faithful to whoever
feeds and kennels it....  Basil Gallatin is mine! And no man—nor no
woman—shall come between us."

She had not forgotten Basil’s expression as he stood in the apartment
entrance, after his _tête-à-tête_ with Helen. "Now—for what’s in _his_
heart," she said.  "I must know just where I stand."  She recalled how
she had used to say, and to think, that if a man was not freely a
woman’s—freely—inevitably—without any need of being held by feminine
artifice—no self-respecting woman could for an instant wish to detain
him.  And here she was, ready to make any sacrifice to hold this man.
Truly, fate seemed determined to compel her to give the lie to
everything she had ever believed, to abase every instinct of pride that
had plumed or still plumed the haughty front of her soul.

Richard asked Helen up to his study after supper, to take dictation of
an article he was doing for a scientific magazine; thus, Courtney had a
chance to explore Basil. She was seated beneath the tall lamp, a big hat
frame on her lap, ribbon and feathers on the small table.  She knew he
was watching her over the top of a newspaper; and she was not insensible
to his extremely flattering expression—nor, perhaps, to the advantages
her occupation gave her in the way of graceful gestures, effective
posings of the head and arms as she studied the effect of different
arrangements of ribbon and feathers.  She glanced directly at him; he
glanced away, confused—the frightened zigzag of a flushed partridge.

"Well?" said she.  She felt more lenient toward him, now that she had
discovered his innocence of overt treachery, at least; and the way he
was looking at her when he fancied her quite unaware was certainly
reassuring.  Also, she realized now that she herself was largely
responsible for these errant springtime thoughts of his—she with her
struggling to keep both love and self-respect.  "Well?" she repeated,
when he did not speak.  "What guilty thought did I almost surprise?"

"No guilty thought," replied he.  "I was loving you—terribly—just then.
I was thinking—how impossible it would be for a man who loved you ever
to wander."

"That’s very nice," said she, with a mocking smile. "So you have
been—looking over the fence?"  And she went on with bending the brim of
the hat frame to a more graceful curve.  She was placid to all
appearances; but once more the great dread was obsessing her.

"Not at all," protested he.  "What fence?  At whom?"

"The fence of our compact—perhaps."

He sighed impatiently.

"Ah—well—"  She laughed, eying the result of her shaping, the hat frame
at one angle, her head at the opposite angle—"there’s Helen."

He looked grave reproach at her, altogether absorbed in trying a long
plume against the frame in different positions.  "Do you think, dear,
it’s quite respectful to Helen——"

"Your thoughts couldn’t harm her," interrupted she—that is, she
interrupted him, but not her work.  "If men’s thoughts smirched women,
what an unsightly lot the attractive ones would be!"

"Where did you get such ideas?" he exclaimed, trying to conceal how her
frankness had scandalized him.

She worked on calmly.  "By observing and reading and thinking—and
feeling."

He drummed uneasily upon the arm of his chair with the tips of his
fingers.  At length he said with some embarrassment, "It’s hardly
necessary for me to say that I have the highest respect for Helen."

"Yes—and I also know she’s very—very pretty."

"Yes, she is pretty."

"You respect her.  You like to talk with her.  You think she is
physically attractive."

Stiffly, "I have never thought about her in that last way."

"Then, that’s probably her chief charm for you," observed Courtney,
placid and reflective and industrious. "When we think we don’t think
about things that are worth thinking about, the chances are we really
haven’t been thinking about anything else."  With a smile and a shake of
the head that might have been for the plumes which refused to please
her, "I’m afraid you’re falling in love with Helen."

"No," replied he judicially—and how he would have been startled if he
had seen her veiled eyes!—shiny green and cruel as those of a puma
stretched in graceful ferocity along the leafy limb that overhangs the
path.  "No, I’m not the least in love with her.  But I do like her.  Her
seriousness is very pleasant, now and then.  If I did not love you, I
perhaps might have grown to care for her, in a way.  But—beside you,
Helen is—tame."

"I shouldn’t call her tame—" encouragingly.

"Well—perhaps not.  She sometimes suggests a person who could be waked
up."

"That’s a temptation, isn’t it?" she asked.  And she looked straight at
him over the top of the plumes.  She wished to see all.

"No," said he, positively.  "To be quite frank I’d never give her as a
woman a thought—if I weren’t—"  He stirred uneasily, burst out in
confession.  "You were right a while ago.  Men often don’t understand
themselves.  But we’ll not talk about that."

There was such love and tenderness in the gaze meeting hers that all the
squalid thoughts her mind had been fouled with the whole day washed away
like the dust and dirt on the leaves and petals of her flowers in a
sudden rain.

He said with a gentle, manly earnestness that thrilled her: "There’s
only the one woman for me.  And—I want our love to be what you wish.
And it shall be!"

She lowered her head, the tears welling.  The others interrupted, and
Helen sat beside her advising about the hat.  When it was finished, she
made Helen try it on.  They all admired, and it certainly was becoming.
"Now, you try it on, dear," said Helen.

"No, don’t take it off," Courtney answered.  "It’s for you, of course."
And she kissed her and, laughing away her thanks, went upstairs.  She
sat down at her dressing table and, with elbows resting on it and face
supported by her hands, gazed into her own eyes.  "If you do not wish to
lose him," she said slowly aloud to her grave face imaged in the glass,
"you must take away from him temptation to wander.  A door is either
open or shut.  A man—a man worth while—won’t stand at the threshold
long.  He comes in or he goes away.  Basil does not realize it, but that
other side of his nature will compel him to go away—unless—"  Compel him
to go away?  She was hearing again the monotonous fall of those icy
rains, was feeling again the monotonous misery of those days without
love and without hope. She must choose.  Choose?  "The woman doesn’t
live—doesn’t deserve to live—who’d hesitate.  There’s no choice. There’s
simply the one way."

Well—since it must be so—what would be the event? Would she lose him
anyhow?  Would she merely be putting off his going?  Would her complete
yielding end in disaster of some kind, as she had feared?  Or, wasn’t it
possible that, while most people were tangled and finally strangled by
the web of their own deceit, a skillful few could use it dextrously to
snare the bright birds of joy? ... She stood up, stretched her arms,
swayed her slim supple figure gently.  "He shall have no reason for
letting one single thought wander.  He shall be mine—all mine!  I’ll
take no more risks."  She continued to sway gently, her eyes closed.  A
look of scorn, of disgust came into her face. She shuddered.  "How
hideous it is to be a woman! Always slave to some man!  Gold fetters cut
as deep as iron, and they’re heavier."  She stopped swaying.  "I can see
how I might come to hate my master in trying to hold his love....  Love!
To keep our love warm, we have to bury it in the mire."




                                  *XX*


Because of the light the tables in the inner laboratory were so placed
that Courtney and Basil worked at opposite sides of the room with their
backs toward each other.  As ten o’clock approached her agitation
increased; but the only outward sign was frequent stolen glances at the
clock on the wall between the windows.  When the hands pointed to ten,
her heart fluttered; for, she heard him push back his chair and knew he
was rising from his case.  He stood at the window toward her side of the
room.  As he was gazing out over the high sill, she was free to look at
him—at his back, at the back of his head.  She felt the struggle raging
in his mind.  Her hand, blundering among the burettes and bottles on the
glass shelves before her, tilted a test tube from its support.  It fell,
broke with a crash on the porcelain surface of the table.  She gave a
low scream it would have been loud had she not, swifter than thought,
clenched her teeth and compressed her lips.  He startled violently.

"Good God!" he cried and his tone showed that his nerves were in the
same state as hers.

"Beg your pardon," she murmured, mechanically apologetic.

If he heard, he gave no indication of it.  He continued to stand
motionless at the window, staring out over the lake. She tried furtively
to get a glimpse of his profile, but could not.  At ten minutes past ten
he moved.  When she saw him about to turn, she bent over her
work—pouring calcium lactophosphate into a small agate mortar as if any
relaxing of attention would be calamitous.  He was standing at the end
of her table, was looking down at her.  It took all her self-control to
refrain from looking up to see what was in his eyes.  He was bending
over her; his lips touched her hair—the crownlike coil of auburn on top
of her head.  She tingled to her finger tips; she knew she had won, knew
he had thought it all out and had seen that his meetings with Helen were
in the direction of disloyalty to the woman he loved.  She looked up at
him now.  At first his expression was guilty and embarrassed, but the
radiance of love and trust in her eyes soon changed that.  He became
very pale as his glance burned into hers; he turned away, and she felt
that it was because he feared lest in the rush of penitent passion he
would confess things it was unnecessary and unwise to put into words.

"Why, it’s ten o’clock," said she carelessly.  "Aren’t you going out to
smoke?"

A pause, then he answered "Not to-day" in a boyishly ill-at-ease way
that brought a secret tender smile to her lips.  She liked these
evidences that it was impossible for him to conceal himself from her
because any attempt to do so made him feel dishonorable.

"It’s beautiful outdoors.  I’ll go with you."

"No, not just now, Courtney.  I—I—that is, I think I’d best finish.
Vaughan may need all four of the sulphates any moment."  And he sat down
before his case and began to fuss with evaporating dishes and crucibles.

"This is the first day you’ve missed in I don’t know when," said she.
It was just as well he should know she had begun to take note of his
habit; that knowledge would strengthen his resolve to avoid in the
future appearance of of evil and temptation thereto.  "You’ve been very
regular for weeks."

"It’s a waste of time," he replied, after a pause. "You’re right,
uninterrupted effort’s the only kind that counts."  And both went to
work.

But Courtney did not overestimate her triumph.  Often day completely
reverses the night view of things.  But now, in the fancy-dispelling day
more clearly than in the fancy-breeding night, she saw she must remove
the temptation. If she had been a small or a stupid woman—or both, for
the two qualities usually go together—she would have laid all the blame
upon Helen and would have sent her away—and in vanity as to her power
over him would have imagined herself once more perfectly secure.  But
the impulse to blame Helen and to get rid of her did not survive the
second thought.  It was not Helen’s fault, or Basil’s; it was nature’s.

Looking back on those months under the compact she saw how she had let
foolish vanity and still more foolish hope befog and mislead her
intelligence.  To remove Helen would avail her nothing.  The law of his
nature would continue to press him on; and sooner or later, in spite of
love for her, in spite of loyalty, in spite of constancy, he would be
swept away from her.  The compact was a beautiful ideal, but it was not
life—and, so, it must yield.  "I must be all to him, or I shall soon be
nothing to him."  And that afternoon she fixed her resolution—after
thinking the situation out sanely—as sanely as she could think in those
days.  For she, completely possessed by her need of Basil, was like all
the infatuated.  That is, she was in a state not unlike those demented
persons who seem to be, and are, quite sane and logical and
self-possessed, once you get beyond the fixed delusion which determines
the posture and outlook of their entire being.

On the way to dress for supper she glanced in at Helen’s open door.  The
girl was sitting near a window giving upon the small west balcony, her
attitude so disconsolate that Courtney was at once striving with a
rising wave of pity and self-reproach.  "Helen will soon get over it,"
she reassured herself; and good sense reminded her that a young girl has
not the experience of love which teaches the experienced woman to value
it and makes her unable to do without it.  "The love-sickness of a young
girl, especially prim, unimaginative girls like Helen, isn’t really
personal; it’s little more than a longing to be flattered and to get
married and settled."  But such small progress as head was making
against heart was lost when Helen looked at her with a pathetic attempt
to smile.

"Where have you been all day?" asked Courtney, eyes sinking before
Helen’s.  She felt a most uncomfortable contempt for herself.

"In Wenona—lunching and shopping with Bertha Watrous."

Courtney entered, seated herself on the bed.  Despite her lovelorn
condition, Helen winced.  "You old maid, you," laughed Courtney, rising.
"I never saw any woman anywhere, not even old Nanny, not even my sister
Ann, so opposed to sitting on the bed."

"I’ve been brought up to think it was—wasn’t right," apologized Helen.

"Wasn’t ladylike, you mean," said Courtney.  She disposed herself in the
window seat.  "What are you blue about, dear?"  She knew she was not
intruding; Helen liked to confide her troubles—and people of that
fortunate temperament were cured by confiding.

"I’m not blue," declared Helen.  "I’ve simply been thinking of what you
said, and if anything I’m angry."

"Oh—Basil?  Did you see him to-day?"

"I did not."  Helen tossed her head.  "I went about my work as
usual—went to the apartment.  If he’d been lying in wait I was ready for
him.  But he wasn’t."

Courtney understood what this really meant, though Helen didn’t.
Probably Helen would not have believed she had in fact lain in wait for
Basil, even had Courtney pointed out to her the obvious meaning of her
action.  She was of the large majority—who do not know their own minds,
who cannot explore them with a guide however competent, who when shown
their own motives hotly and honestly deny.  "Basil was busy to-day,"
Courtney explained.  "Some sulphates Richard was in a hurry for."

Helen looked relieved.  But, still not in the least aware of her own
state of mind, she went on, with a toss of the head: "Well—whenever I do
see him alone, I’ll make him realize I’m not the sort he thinks.  The
more I look at it, Courtney, the more convinced I am that he was simply
leading me on."

"Now, Helen!" laughed Courtney.

Helen colored.  "I admit," she said, shamefacedly, "I got what I
deserved for being so—so forward."

"That’s the truth—you were forward."  Courtney’s tone made this
necessary thrusting home of the painful truth gentle but not the less
insistent.  "We must never fool ourselves, dear.  We women can’t afford
to."

Studying Helen, so clearly fascinated still by the idea of winning the
young eligible from the East and redeeming him, Courtney realized that
if the girl was to stay on there in peace she must be made to see the
absolute uselessness of angling.  So long as she thought of Basil as a
possibility, however remote, so long would she be in danger of falling
utterly and miserably in love with him.  Yes, Helen must be cured—but
how?  There was no way.  Not until Basil was married would Helen cease
to hope.  "For her own sake, I ought to send her away," Courtney was
thinking as the two sat there in silence.  But Helen had no other place
to go.  True, she could go out and make her own living as a
teacher—Courtney envied her the training and the certificate that were
practically a guaranty of independence. But Helen abhorred independence,
looked on a woman’s working, away from the shelter of domesticity, as
the Hindu looks on loss of caste.  No, Helen must stay on, might as well
stay on....  An impossible situation.  And from this unanticipated
quarter came one more imperative reason for making Basil wholly her own.
He must be in such a state of mind that he would do nothing to encourage
Helen’s hope to put forth even the feeblest of its ready sprouts.

Courtney rose and moved toward the door.  "I must dress."  She leaned
against the jamb, her cheek upon her crossed hands.  "Well, my dear,
remember the rhyme about the lady who went for a ride on a tiger, and
how, when they came back, he had the lady inside."

"You’re laughing at me," reproached Helen.

Courtney’s eyes were fixed dreamily upon vacancy, a strange sad smile
about her lips.  "I am not laughing," she said slowly.  "Or, if I am, it
is not at you....  Not at you, but at—"  She could not tell Helen that
she was drearily mocking her own entrapped and helpless self. "Take my
advice, child.  Don’t _ever_ lead a tiger out for an airing."

Yes, Helen should stay on, as long as she wished to stay.  "And hasn’t
she as much right here as I—just the same right?"

At two o’clock that night, as Basil was leaving, he said—"You’ve hardly
spoken since I came.  Is it the darkness?"

"Yes—the darkness," she replied in the same undertone—the doors were
very thick, but instinct made them careful about speech.

"I never knew you to be so silent—or so strange, now that I think of
it."  He held her by the shoulders. "Courtney, did you want me to come
to-night?"

She clung to him.  "Do you love me, my Basil?"

"How queer your voice sounds.  Are you frightened?"

"No—no, indeed."

"Dear, you’re not telling me——"

"It’s nothing.  Just a—a notion.  There won’t be so much of it next
time.  And still less the next time.  And soon I’ll be quite
accustomed."

"Yes, I’m sure there’s not the least danger," said he, wholly
misunderstanding.




                                 *XXI*


One afternoon she was reading in the hammock on the balcony before the
upper sitting-room windows—the sitting room she shared with Helen and
Winchie.  She heard some one in the room, glanced up—Richard was before
her. "Glad to find you alone," said he.  "Do you realize it’s several
weeks since we’ve exchanged so much as a single word in private?"

"Something wrong at the shop?"

"No.  I came especially to talk with you.  How’d you like to go away for
a week or so—to the sea or the mountains?  We might take that trip
through the Great Lakes."

"I’ll see."

"You’ve been working very hard down at the shop. And by the way, you’ve
caused an amazing improvement in Basil’s work.  He doesn’t make those
stupid mistakes any more.  He used to make them every day.  Yes—you’ve
worked hard—and well."

She had no pleasure in these incredible compliments from Richard the
difficult to please in chemistry.  It was too disquieting to have him
thus watchful and interested.

"Let’s start at once," he proposed.

"Oh, I couldn’t do that.  I hesitate to leave here—when everything’s at
its best.  In the fall—or next winter——"

"I see you don’t want to go—with me."

His tone compelled her to look at him.  His eyes—grave, searching—were
fixed upon her.  Instinct suddenly warned her of danger—what danger or
where she could not see, but the warning was imperative.  "Indeed I do,"
protested she, with a deceptive show of interest, though her skin burned
as her fundamental and incurable honesty cried shame upon her—as it
always did when she, compelled by her circumstances, could not avoid the
lie direct. "But," she went on, "you can’t expect a woman, with a
household like this on her mind, to drop everything and fly at a few
hours’ notice."

He reflected, nodded.  "That’s true.  Though, really, the servants are
so experienced they’d go on just as well. My dear old aunt was
thorough."

There was a little bitterness of hurt vanity in her smile of recognition
at this ancient notion of Richard’s about her part in that household.
She felt that the _tête-à-tête_ had already lasted too long.  "Was
Winchie in there?" she asked.

"I didn’t see him," replied Dick.

She moved toward the nearest sitting-room window.

"What’s the matter?" he cried, irritated.  "Where are you going?"

"After Winchie.  I haven’t thought of him for an hour. Helen’s away—at
the Foster picnic——"

"The boy’s all right.  Sit down here and——"

But she was gone.  She did not slacken her speed until she was safely
clear of him.  This new development of his threatened to become an
annoyance, thought she; however, it couldn’t last much longer; she would
continue to keep out of his way; the laboratory would take hold of him
and she would be once more forgotten and free. Meanwhile, she would
avoid him.

And soon he did become once more absorbed, and resumed his accustomed
shadowy place in her life—seen yet not seen, heard yet not heard,
present yet absent; neither liked nor disliked, but unknown and
unheeded—the place of many and many a husband in a marriage that seems
happy and successful to the very servants in the household, to the
husband and wife themselves.  One evening he abruptly left the table.
She saw, but did not note, his departure.  When supper was over and she
and Helen and Basil strolled into the sitting room, Basil took advantage
of Helen’s being apart to say to Courtney, "What’s wrong with him?"

"I’m sure I don’t know," replied she.  "Nothing, I guess."

"Didn’t you notice?  He was staring furiously at you, and left in a
rage."

She shrugged her shoulders.  That night she was in one of her reckless
moods, was nervous, excited, with eyes the more brilliant for the
circles round them.  Richard appeared in the farthest of the long open
windows.  He frowned at Basil, said sharply to his wife, "Courtney, I’d
like to speak to you out here a moment."

"It’s chilly there," objected she.  "Come in."  And she went toward the
piano.

Dick entered.  His long aristocratic face was stern and his eyes glowed
somberly.  "Then let’s go into the library," said he, in a tone so
positive that from him it sounded like a command.

She hesitated, reflectively caressing one slim tapering arm.  "Very
well," said she, and passed into the hall, he standing formally aside at
the doorway.  In the library, she faced him with eyes half closed and
chin thrust up and a little out.  "Well?" she inquired.

As he looked at his sweet frivolous little child of a wife, his manner
softened toward that of one rebuking a child’s trespass.  "I want you to
go upstairs and wrap up your shoulders—or change your dress."

She glanced down.  The bodice did not cover the upper curve of her
bosom, had no straps across the shoulders or on the arms.  In the back,
it dipped almost to the waist line.  She looked at him with a quizzical
expression.  "I’m quite warm enough, thanks."

"You understand me," said he, more severely.

She gazed straight into his eyes before answering. "Yes, I do.  But I
prefer to pretend not to."

"I’ve spoken to you about my wishes in this matter before.  Do you know
what made me notice your—your nakedness?  Pardon me for putting it that
way, but I see I must speak plainly."

Her face expressed faint, contemptuous indifference. "I cannot talk with
you.  Your ideas of women ought to be buried in the grave with your
grandfather.  I do not dictate the cut of your clothes.  You will not
dictate mine."  And she moved toward the door.

He put himself between.  "I saw Gallatin looking at you with an
expression—"  He made a gesture of rage—a quiet gesture but significant.
"I don’t blame him.  It’s your fault.  You’ve no right to tease a man
who can be nothing to you.  I speak frankly because——"

"Gallatin has seen thousands of women in just such dress as this,"
interrupted she.  It enraged her to hear her lover’s feelings for her,
in which flesh was mere medium between spirit and spirit, thus leveled
to the carnality of his own passion.  "You," she continued icily, "read
your own poisonous, provincial primness and—and vulgarity into his look,
no doubt."

"You are an innocent, pure-minded woman, Courtney," said Richard, with
more gentleness.  "You follow a fashion, thinking of it only as a
fashion.  I assure you, that sort of fashion is devised in Paris by
cocottes for the one purpose.  If you knew men better, you’d appreciate
it."

She appreciated the penetration of this remark, puncturing the
pretentious haughtiness of her protest.  She was surprised at his
reasoning so shrewdly about a matter she would not have suspected him of
having given a thought. But she must not let him interfere in her
personal affairs. "Whatever its origin," said she, "it’s the
conventional fashion for women.  I shall continue to wear it."  And she
looked into his eyes pleasantly.  Now, it struck her as amusing, the
anger of this alien, about the exhibition to others of what he regarded
as his own private and personal treasure.  Just one stage removed from
the harem, such an idea as his.  "And," she went on, aloud, "if your
satrapship commands me to wear a veil over my face and muffle my figure
in a loose black bag, I shall make the same reply.  You can’t realize
it, but the old-fashioned ideal of good, pure woman was really something
to be handled with tongs and disinfected."

"You’re talking of things you, being a good woman, know nothing about."

"At any rate I know a mind that ought to be quarantined—when I smell
it."  And she made a wry face and started to leave the room.  When she
had got as far as the threshold, he cried, "Courtney!" and his tone told
her that he had caught sight of the reverse view of her costume—the
unimpeded display of slender dimpled shoulders and straight smooth back
almost to the waist line. She pretended not to hear, went on to the
sitting room. Yielding altogether now to the imp of the perverse, she
displaced Helen at the piano and sang the maddest, most melting love
songs she knew.  Basil tried to keep to the far part of the room; but
gradually the enchantment compelled.  Forgetting Richard—though he had
seen him glowering and fuming from the darkness of the veranda—he leaned
upon the end of the grand piano.  His eyes were down, but his burning
face and his trembling fingers as he raised or lowered his cigarette
proclaimed how the deep passionate notes of her voice were vibrating
through him.

It was somewhat later than usual when she went upstairs. As she pressed
the button just inside her bedroom door and the light came on—a soft
pale violet light that seemed to permeate rather than to shine—she saw
Richard in the window.  His back was toward her and he was smoking so
that the odor and the smoke would not come into the room.  He threw the
cigarette over the balcony rail and turned.  The instant she looked at
him, little as she knew of his character or noted his moods she saw she
had gone too far.  But she held a calm, undaunted front. "How you
frightened me," said she, in a tone that had no fright in it.  "I’m
horribly tired.  I must stop eating desserts.  They wear one out."  She
stifled a yawn, took the small diamond sunburst from the front of her
waist and laid it on the bureau.  She seemed all but unconscious of his
presence; in reality, by way of the bureau mirror, she was watching him
as a duelist an adversary.  "I shall fall asleep before I can get into
bed."

"I shall detain you only a moment."  His grave, exaggerated politeness
did not decrease her inward agitation. "I simply wish to tell you," he
went on, "that, as you seem determined to persist in your own mistaken
way, I shall be compelled to ask Gallatin to stay away from the house in
the evenings."

Her impulse was to smile disdain at the infantile futility of this.  And
the smile did come to her lips, and lingered there to mask the feelings
that came surging with the second thought.  For she instantly realized
how helpless she was.  This man had no part in her life nor she in his;
yet he could impose his will upon her absolutely because he could take
Basil away from her—not merely for the unimportant evenings, but
altogether.  He could make it impossible for Basil to remain—could do it
by a mere word to him.  And she who fancied she had provided against
every possible contingency had never even thought of this, the most
obvious peril, and the greatest!  Faint, she leaned upon the bureau,
spreading her arms so that she seemed to be merely at ease.  "But why
tell _me_ about it?" said she to him.  "Why didn’t you simply say it to
him?"  She smiled contemptuously.  "And what will he think?"

Dick’s calm vanished.  "I don’t care a damn what he thinks," he cried.
"At least, he’ll not be sitting round watching you half dressed."

She drew herself up haughtily.  "Good night," said she.

"I was out on the veranda," Dick rushed on.  "I saw him.  He forgot
Helen—forgot decency—honor—everything—and leaned there, giving himself
up to a debauch. Yes, to a debauch!  And _you_ are responsible.  Not
he—not at all.  You, alone.  At least, anger doesn’t make me unjust.
And I will say too, you were innocent in the matter—like a willful
child.  Good pure women don’t appreciate——"

"But _I_ do," interrupted she.  "I’m not the imbecile Aunt Eudosia sort
you admire so much."

"I tell you, the man’s in love with you," cried Richard.

She all but staggered before the shock.

"Yes, in love with you.  That’s why he came back here."

As steadily and indifferently as she could contrive she went to the
sofa, seated herself.  "Why, you yourself told me he was in love with
Helen."

"I was mistaken.  How could he be in love with her, when you’re about?
A man always takes to the best-looking woman."

She laughed with friendly conciliating coquetry.  "I’m afraid you’re
prejudiced."

"I saw it this evening.  The way he was listening to those love songs!"

"Are you sure he was thinking of me?"

Richard did not answer.

"Perhaps Helen’s equally sure he was thinking of her."

Under cover of the talk she—hardly knowing what she, or he, was
saying—darted this way and that, seeking an escape from the horror
closing in upon her.  She felt like a hiding slave, hearing the distant
bay of the bloodhounds. How escape?  How throw him off the scent?  Was
there only the one way?

"No, he cares nothing about Helen," Richard was saying. And clear and
soft in his voice now was the note she dreaded.  "At least, he didn’t
this evening.  How could he when you were there?  Courtney, you simply
can’t understand.  You’re modest and pure minded and innocent——"

"Then it was only this evening?" she interrupted. "I was hoping you had
real reason for flattering me."

"Flattering you!"

"Certainly.  Wouldn’t it flatter you if I were to tell you Helen was in
love with you?  She’s in love with somebody, by the way.  It must be
you—how could she think of any other man when you were about?"

Dick half smiled.

"And I must begin to tear my hair and foam at the mouth, I suppose,"
continued she.  She rose, stamped her foot, in melodramatic imitation of
jealous fury.  "Helen shall keep to her room in the evenings!  Do you
hear, sir? When I think of the times I’ve let you take her up to your
study—alone!—under pretense of working!  You—with your shirt sleeves
rolled up and your collar open!"

"You silly child!"  Dick was amused now.

"But I don’t blame Helen.  How could she help it—with you leading her
on——"

Dick laughed.  "That’s very shrewd," said he.  "I own up.  I guess I was
having a jealous fit.  But you’d understand if you could see yourself as
I see you."  And he clasped her.

"No—no!" she gasped.

Completely possessed by his mood he was too much the man to have the
power to see that her mood was different.  Holding her tightly, he said:
"I do believe you acted that way this evening just to make me jealous.
I admit I seem neglectful.  But I love you, just as I always did."

She was struggling to escape as strongly as she dared—more strongly than
her instinct of prudence approved—more strongly than her physical self
desired, for she realized with horror that his mood was hypnotizing her
will.

"Listen, dear," he said.  "I’ve got a confession to make.  While I was
raging up and down on the veranda, all sorts of devilish thoughts came
to me—suspicious——"

She ceased struggling.

"I got to thinking how long we’ve been living apart—and how, every time
I made advances, you seemed to evade——"

She felt herself growing cold.  He must have felt it, too, for he
hastened on: "Please, little girl, don’t get cross. I didn’t _really_
suspect.  I’m not so ridiculous.  I know a good woman could no more be
false even in thought to her husband—than a nightingale could change
into a snake."

It was pounding, pounding at the walls of her brain that he was on the
very verge of the discovery; that unconsciously he was fighting against
a suspicion which too long-pent passion was thrusting at him ever more
pointedly. Another repulse, another jealous fit, and—five lives
overwhelmed in ruin.

She lay quiet in his arms.


In those next few days she was whimsical, capricious, fantastic.
Richard, once more wholly the man of science, was as unconscious as
mountain peak of storms in the valleys far below.  Basil and the others,
but particularly Basil, watched her with a kind of dread.  "I need a
change—in fact, I must have it," she announced at the supper table.
"Helen, let’s go to Chicago and shop.  The things in Wenona are hideous
this spring."

"I need a change too," Richard startled them all by saying, "I’ll go
with you—and Helen can take care of the house and Basil—and Winchie, if
you’ll leave him."

"I don’t want to be left!" cried Winchie.  "You wouldn’t leave _me_,
mamma?"

Courtney did not hear.  She was looking at Richard as if his words
jarred upon her savagely, goaded her to the verge of outburst.  She had
been feeling toward her husband as she would have felt toward an
inanimate object which had bruised her when she by accident stumbled
heavily against it.  She did not seek the source of this feeling, or let
it disclose itself to her.  She simply felt so; and when he spoke of
going, it seemed as unthinkable that she should let him go as that she
should leave Winchie behind. When she had herself in hand, she said:
"This is a shopping trip.  No men wanted or allowed."

"Not even _me_, mamma?" pleaded Winchie.

"Except you," said she.

And the two women and Winchie went the following day, to spend a busy
fortnight in the Chicago shops buying for all three and for the house.
As Courtney had limited means and exacting taste, the labor of shopping
was hard and tedious, especially in those vast modern stores.  For there
the satisfaction of having everything under one roof is balanced by the
vexation of the search for the needle of just what one wants and can
afford through the mountainous haystack of what one does not want or
cannot afford. The toil almost prostrated the two women—and poor Winchie
who had to drag along since there was no one at the hotel to whom
Courtney would trust him.  But she felt more than repaid, not so much by
her purchases, though she was on the whole content with them, as by the
complete change in her point of view.

The atmosphere of the city is wholly different from that of such a place
as Wenona.  In Wenonas, the individual is important; the sky seems near,
and its awful problems of the eternal verities—life and death, right and
wrong—thrust at every one every moment of day and night.  In a city, the
sky yields to brick and stone; men see each other, not the universe; the
eternal verities seem eternal bores, and life, of the day, of the hour,
tempts with its—"Since you are mere maggot in rotten cheese—tiny maggot,
one of billions—tremendous cheese—since you are to die to-morrow and
decay and be forgotten—since you can fret and fritter all your years
away over life and death, over right and wrong, without getting a hair’s
width nearer solving them—why not perk up—amuse yourself—do as little
harm as is consistent with getting what you need, and have all the fun
there is going?  Don’t take yourself solemnly!"  The city’s egotism is
showy, but shallow; the country’s, hidden but profound.

Viewed from Chicago, all the beauty, all the possibilities of happiness
in her life in that lovely place on the shore of Wenona Lake stood out
as in the landscape of a master painter; and all that fretted and shamed
her and shot her joys with black thread of foreboding seemed the work of
her own tainted imagination.  "I’m harming no one," she now argued.
"I’m free—Richard freed me when he made me realize I was to him not a
wife but simply a carnal incident.  And I am helping to make life there
peaceful and even happy.  The trouble with me is I’m still under the
blight of my early training—a training in how to die, not in how to
live.  True, I do lead a double life.  But how few human beings do not
lead double lives of one kind or another?  And where am I worse than
thousands who long but have not courage or chance?  Isn’t it better to
live in deceit with a man one loves than to live in deceit with a man
one loathes?"  If she and Basil were found out, they would be classed
with the rest of the vulgar intriguers. But that did not make them thus
low; it was not their fault that the world saw only coarseness for the
same sort of reason that a man in green spectacles saw everything green.

She came back as much improved in mental health as in dress—and
certainly the new clothes were a triumph. Also, her sense of
self-respect seemed to be restored—"and whether I’m right in my way of
looking at things or am deceiving myself, I’m certainly much the better
for feeling I’m right."

They brought part of the spoils of the city with them, but most of it
came by freight a week after their return. Courtney and Helen were
almost as excited as Winchie—and Winchie was quite beside himself—when
the great packing cases and crates were opened, and the treasures of
dresses and underclothes and "stunning" hats and fascinating shoes and
slippers and parasols and blouses, and the furniture and pictures came
into view from endless wrappings of paper and bagging and excelsior, of
boxes round and square, boxes small and large, boxes fancy and plain.
Everything, with not an exception, looked better than it had in the shop
when it was bought.  "You are a wonderful shopper, Courtney.  These
things seem as if they were made especially for us," Helen asserted.
And Winchie, literally pale with emotion, screamed, "Mamma Courtney,
let’s go back and buy some more!"

For several days the agitation continued.  Indeed, it was a month or
longer before the last ripples died away, and the normal calm was
restored.  Helen had new clothes as well as Courtney—and never had she
looked so lovely. Winchie was the most stylish person of his age in all
that region.  The Donaldson children had theretofore been disposed to
feel somewhat superior because they had a real imported French
governess; they now paid court to him and accepted his decisions about
games as reverently as a company of New York men accept the judgments of
any man with millions.  And the new furniture and dishes, the new wall
paper, the new cooking utensils, the new contrivances for plants and for
cut flowers, some of which Courtney had had made from her own designs,
were as successful as the clothes.  Also, Courtney—and Helen too—had,
through the stimulus of the city, a multitude of new ideas for house and
grounds and gardens.  These they proceeded to carry out, Basil assisting
whenever he could get an afternoon away from the laboratory where
Richard had now buried himself, oblivious of her, of them all.
Altogether, May and June of that year made a new high-water mark of
happiness.  And when Helen, going to Saint X to visit and display her
finery, returned in a self-complacent state of mind that indicated a
complete cure, a complete restoration of her old-time content, Courtney
felt as if the last cloud had disappeared from her horizon. Again and
again during those tranquil, sparkling days she told herself—and almost
believed—that at last her life was "settled right"—as nearly "right" as
a human life could be.

One night when she had an appointment with Basil she found Helen still
up as she was about to descend and admit him.  Helen did not put out her
light until nearly three quarters of an hour after the time.  When she
opened the lake-front door no one entered; not a sound.  She looked out.
The veranda empty; the lawns dreaming undisturbed in the moonlight; wave
on wave of the heavy perfume of summer’s flowers.  But not anywhere
Basil.  Her trembling ceased; she darted to the edge of the veranda,
everything forgotten but the supreme fact—he was gone.  Gone!  Why, she
could not doubt; for, from time to time she had seen in his eyes the
suspicion which, unjust though it was, she dared not discuss with him.
Where had he gone?  She must know, must know at once.

She gave not a thought to leaving the house—the dangers that made it
impossible for them to meet at his apartment. She sped across the lawn,
along the path through the pale splendor of the east flower garden and
blossoming shrubbery, into the dark wood.  And with her sped her old
enemy—the specter dread of losing him—the ghost so easily started from
its unquiet grave.  She flitted on until she stood at the edge of the
clearing, with wildly beating heart, looking up at the solitary
building, gloomy in its creeper draperies.  There was light from his
bedroom window.  She gave a quick gasp of relief.  At least he was still
within reach.  The phantom beat of icy rains falling, falling ceased to
freeze her heart.

Panting from the tumult of her thoughts rather than from the run, she
knocked on the entrance door—knocked again, loudly—a third time—a
fourth.  She was shaking from head to foot.  No answer—none.  She tried
the door; it yielded.  She darted up the stairway, her body now fire and
now ice.  He was in his bedroom door, was watching her.  As the light
came from behind him she could not immediately see his expression; but
she felt it was dark and angry.  She flung herself on his breast—"My
love—my love!" she sobbed.

His arms hung at his sides.  He stood rigid.

"Basil!  Put your arms round me.  I’m cold—and so frightened."

He pushed her away.

She leaned against the door frame sobbing into her hands.  Her long
plaits hung one over either shoulder.  She looked like a child, a
broken-hearted child.  "And you’ve been pretending to love me!"

"I do love you.  That’s the worst of it."

"Love!"  She turned upon him passionately.  "You call _that_—love?  No
matter what I did, wouldn’t you know I’d done it for our love’s sake?
Yes, you know all that’s I is yours—every thought—every heart throb."
She was sobbing again, her arm on the door frame, her face against it.
She was thinking how unsympathetic he was, how selfish and cruel—was
asking herself why she did not hate him, cast him out of her life.  But
the very suggestion made her heartsick.  Cast out him who was her life!

"I didn’t mean it," he pleaded.  "I was crazed with jealousy."

"Jealousy!  Basil—Basil!"

"I can’t help it.  I’m human."

"But don’t you know me?  Oh, sweetheart—don’t take from me all the
self-respect I’ve got."

He seated himself, stared doggedly at the floor.  There was a long, a
heavy silence which he finally broke. "Courtney," he said, "we’re both
going straight to hell."  He looked sternly at her.  "We’ve got to get
away from here."

She saw the resolve in his eyes, trembled, grew still. Then she
remonstrated gently, "You’d forbid me to treat Winchie so, if I wanted
to."

He continued to look straight and stern at her.  "Either you go with me
or I go alone."

Her knees grew weak.  The room swam before her eyes.  The big wave in
the picture on the opposite wall swelled, lowered, seemed swooping down
on her.  "Oh, no—you wouldn’t do that," she murmured.  "No—you couldn’t
do that."

"I’ll leave in the morning, unless you say you’ll leave with me the day
after."

She watched him, relentless and utterly inconsiderate, and her anger
rose.  "You’ve no right to go!" she cried.

"I must," he replied.  "Do you mean to say you’ll let me leave without
you?"

"Yes—if you’d do it," replied she.  "But you wouldn’t. You’d not leave
me to bear the whole burden alone.  You’d not be a coward."

His florid face became crimson.  He fought for self-control, gave up the
hopeless struggle, flung himself down beside her.  "I can’t go—I can’t,"
he cried.  "But—how can I stay?  It’s dragging us down—down."  He was
almost weeping.  "Courtney, you must see it’s dragging us down."

For the first time she had the sense of strength in herself greater than
his, of weakness in him.  She caressed his fair hair tenderly.  "It’s
only a mood, dearest—only a mood.  It’ll pass—and we’ll help each other,
and be strong. We’ll look forward to the end of this.  For, in a few
years Winchie’ll be off to school.  Then—I shall be free to make my own
life.  I’ll go away to visit—stay on and on—and gradually——"

"You must promise you will not live with him."

"I will do my best.  But—I must protect Winchie—and us."

He grew red, then pale, was silent for a time.  Then he said
irritatedly, weakly, "But don’t you see what a position it puts _me_
in!"

"And me?"  She said it very quietly, with a certain restrained pathos.
But he sat glum and moody, thinking of his own plight.

He roused himself.  "All right," he cried, in a tone of contempt—for
himself and for her.  He embraced her with a kind of insolent
familiarity.  "Then I’ll stay.  If I went, I’d only come sneaking back.
I’m no longer a man.  I’m a slave to you."  And he held her at arms
length and eyed her with an expression that told her he was making
inventory of her charms.

"Please don’t talk that way," she begged, offended and wounded by that
expression in his eyes more than she dared admit to herself.  "I know
you don’t mean it.  I know you—love.  I know——"

"Love—let’s only talk of love," he interrupted.

She fell to wondering whether, when they were together in the dark, his
unseen eyes had this look—and why it made his words and his caresses
seem so different from the words and caresses of the darkness.  She had
never thought of it before; she hated to learn it then—just then; but
she could not push away the monstrous truth that love and lust have the
same vocabulary, the same gestures, the same tones, differ only in their
eyes.

"What are you thinking about so solemnly?" he asked.

"I wasn’t thinking solemnly," she protested with a hastily forced smile.
"I was simply remembering how rarely we’ve been together alone—really
alone—except in the dark, for a long long time."

"It’s good to be able to see you," said he, and she felt like hiding in
shame from his eyes.  "You streamer of flame that’s burning up my soul."

Her lips echoed his laugh.  "What nonsense," she said.

"It’s the truth," declared he.  "But—burn on!  I can’t live without it."

The smile left her lips—it had not been in her eyes. "If I thought
you——"

He stopped her mouth with a kiss.  "Only love!" he commanded.  "No
thought."

"That’s right," she cried eagerly.  "No thought!  Just feeling—just
love.  We must not think.  It’s the cause of our unhappiness."

And she tried to be as good as her word.  "I do love him, and he loves
me," she rebuked herself.  "I’m unstrung—hysterical—full of crazy
fancies.  I mustn’t—_mustn’t_—fret at his way of loving. I must always
think, ’What would become of me if I lost him?’"  And she pretended to
be in his mood; for the sake of a passion that had been, she simulated a
passion that was not.




                                 *XXII*


Masculine moral struggle is usually noisier than feminine—unless the
woman is seeking to impress some man, before yielding of her own free
will what she wishes him to fancy his superior charm and force and
subtlety are conquering.  Thus, woman being by nature freer from the
footless kinds of hypocrisy than man, it was only in the regular order
that while Courtney quietly accepted the situation and conformed to it,
Basil should accept it with much moral bluster.  He accused now his own
wickedness, now the wickedness of destiny, and again woman’s sinful
charms. Still, the masculine conscience no less than the feminine is
bred to be an ultimately accommodating chaperon; and Basil’s conscience
would soon have gone to sleep had it not been kept awake and feverish by
a contrasting presence. That contrast was Helen’s virginal beauty and
virginal purity—both of which fascinated his overstimulated and
degenerating imagination.

Helen was, as Courtney had said, a girl of the old-fashioned type.  This
does not mean that she was a rare survival of an extinct type, but
simply that she was the girl of yesterday as distinguished from the girl
of to-morrow, and from the girl that is partly of yesterday, partly of
to-morrow—all three of whom we have with us in this transitional to-day.
Helen had by inheritance and training all woman’s ancient instincts to
be a possessed and protected property.  These instincts originated in
the necessities and the ignorance of former societies; but they are
cultivated and clung to because masculine vanity dotes on the superior
attitude, and because the female very humanly finds it more comfortable
to be looked after than to look after herself, to have her thinking done
for her than to think for herself, to be supported than to support
herself, to be strong through weakness than to be strong through
strength.  The male wants to pose as master.  The female yields, since
the usual cost to her is merely putting up with airs of superiority at
which she can secretly laugh; at worst, the cost is only that intangible
thing, self-respect.  So, why not?  Self-respect is purely subjective,
unseen.  It provides no comforts or luxuries.  Lack of it attracts no
attention in a world that sees only surfaces.  So, why not sacrifice it,
when it becomes inconvenient?  Men do.  Why shouldn’t women?

Helen had no desire to be of full human stature—to be free.  She wished
to be a "true woman," meek servant of a lord and master, and never under
the painful necessity of taking responsible thought for herself.  Having
no capacity or desire for comradeship with men, she denounced it as
unwomanly.  Her physical virtue—"purity," she called it—she regarded as
her chief glory.  She was glad it was still woman’s chief asset in the
struggle for existence; for, she could not help knowing she had beauty,
and it is beauty that makes virtue valuable, though of course beauty
adds nothing to its glory.

Helen certainly had beauty, nearly as great beauty as she imagined in
that heart of hearts where our vanity feels free to spread its tail to
the last gaudy feather and to strut as no peacock or gobbler ever dared.
Her skin was white as milk, her features were classically regular, and
she was now a shade taller than Basil, could almost look level-eyed at
Richard.  Her dark hair was commonplace in color and texture, was rather
short, did not grow especially well about her brow or behind the ears;
but it was thick and abundant, and the brow and the ears were charming
in themselves. Thanks to Courtney’s skill in devising a corset, the
defect of waist too close to bust was no longer conspicuous.  She had
sound teeth, good arms and legs, narrow hands and feet.  Her large brown
eyes were of the kind that has been regarded as ideal for woman from the
days of Homer singing the ox-eyed Juno, down to our own day when
intelligence is trying to get a place among feminine virtues and the
look of intelligence among feminine beauties.  She had learned from
Courtney—who knew—a great deal about dress—dress that all women talk,
but only the rare exceptional woman knows.

Also, she had from her a practical training for what she regarded as
woman’s only sphere, the home.  Courtney had taught her how to keep
house with comfort, order and system.  As Courtney had none of the
teacher’s vanity but used the method of suggestion, she fancied she had
learned and was learning from herself; the more so, since she in
defiance of daily experience could not credit a woman of Courtney’s
lively and, because light, undoubtedly thoughtless and careless
temperament, with enough seriousness to be a good housekeeper.  Helen
there showed herself about on a level with the human average; for all
but incredible is the stupidity of our misjudgments and mismeasurements
of our fellow beings.  There was not in her the capacity to reflect who
thought out the new ideas that were constantly being put into effect,
who told her what to do and who quietly and tactfully saw that she did
it.

The most obvious improvement in Helen was through her unconsciously
acting on Courtney’s advice of delicately veiled suggestion and dropping
the culture pose.  She was now patterning upon Courtney’s naturalness so
far as she could.  She had the handicap of an ingrained and incurable
passion for those innocuous little tricks of manner with the men; also,
she was greatly hindered by a conventional assortment of the so-called
"lofty ideals."  Still, she was letting much of her own natural
personality appear.  She was only slightly exaggerating her bent toward
sweetness and sympathy.  She was not quite so strenuous in advocacy of
fine old-fashioned womanliness—heart without mind, purity that is mere
strait jacketed carnality; virtue that, when it yields, makes lofty
pretense of yielding only in reluctant tolerance of man’s coarseness and
of nature’s shameful way of reproducing.  At Tecumseh, when Dr. Madelene
Ranger delivered a course of lectures on the profession all young women
are candidates for—that is, on matrimony—to the girls of the senior
class of the college of liberal arts, Helen was one of those who refused
to attend and signed the—unheeded—protest to the faculty.  She was no
longer so proud of this as she had been, although she still thought she
had done what ought to be right though it rather seemed foolish.

But the greatest improvement of all in Helen was the subtlest.  She had
come there, expecting to be a dependent, feeling and, in a sweet refined
way, acting like the poor relation, harbored on sufferance.  Women,
trained from the outset to be dependents, easily degenerate into
sycophants, like men who have always looked to others for employment and
have lost self-confidence if they ever had it.  But lack of
self-reliance, a vice in a man, is regarded as a virtue in a woman; so,
women have absolutely no restraint upon their abandoning even the forms
of self-respect, once they get in the way of degenerating.  Thus,
Helen’s relations with Courtney might easily have become what is usually
seen where there is intimacy between a poor woman and a woman of means.
But Courtney—not deliberately but with the unconsciousness of large
natures—made this degradation impossible.  It was not merely that Helen
had not been made to feel a dependent; it was more—far more.  It was
that she had been made to feel independent, more independent than
Courtney herself felt.  And this fine feeling, this erectness of spirit,
permeated to every part of her character, would have made a
full-statured human being of her, had she had the mentality to shake off
her early training as mere conventional female.

Richard frankly declared her an ideal woman; Basil secretly agreed with
him.  Helen became the constant reminder of his lost honor, of the
heaven he had given up for the forbidden delights.  He reveled in
Courtney the tempest; but during the lulls his eyes turned yearningly to
Helen, the serene and pure calm.  Courtney represented sinful excess,
Helen righteous restraint.  Courtney’s was love the devastator; a love
for Helen would be love the uplifter.  He wanted Courtney; he felt that
Helen was what he ought to want.  And in the lulls, with passion
exhausted and needing the stimulus of contrast—he sometimes fancied
that, if he could somehow contrive to assert his manhood and escape from
slavery to Courtney, he would be happy with Helen, and once more noble
and good.  Like many another, he flattered himself that he had an
aspiration to a better life when in reality he was making pretense of
virtuous longing merely to whet his appetite for vice. He shut his eyes
to the obvious but rarely seen—or, rather, rarely admitted—truth that a
man is as he does, not as he pretends or dreams.

Before finally and fully condemning Basil—or Courtney or anyone—for
anything he or she may have done contrary to our views of propriety and
morality, it would be well to reflect upon the true nature of
conscience—to which Basil and Courtney and all of us habitually refer
all moral questions for settlement.  As we grow older we are awed or
amused rather than shocked—and, unless we have lived as the moles and
the earthworms, are not astonished at all—by the wondrous ways in which
our conscience adjusts itself to necessity—or to what overwhelming
inclination makes us believe to be necessity.  But in unanalytic youth
such adjustments take place unconsciously to ourselves; the mind, in the
parts of itself hidden from us, concocts the proof positive that what we
desire is necessary and right; all we are conscious of is that we
suddenly have the mandate of necessity and the godspeed of conscience.
Thus, conscience in youth can be as flexible as occasion may require,
yet can, without hypocrisy, be for the conduct of others a very Draco of
a lawgiver, a very Brutus of a judge.  This, in youth only.  But—  How
many of us ever do grow up?

The free-and-easy mode of life at the house made it impossible for any
two to be alone, except by stealth, without everyone’s knowing it.  As a
man who since early youth had led the "man sort of life" he was
thoroughly used to associating the idea stealth with the relations of
men and women.  However, flexible though conventional "honor" is, he had
misgivings about bending it to the requirements of desire in this
particular case.  But as his longing for such a moral invigorator as
Helen’s innocent purity grew in intensity, he began deliberately to
revolve contriving to see her alone again, and by stealth.  His first
success was accidental—callers occupying Courtney when he came seeking
her.  As he turned away from the house he spied Helen, seated under a
maple tree sewing near where Winchie and the older Donaldson boy were
playing ball.  She colored faintly when he dropped to the grass near her
and lit a cigarette.  He so placed himself that he commanded all
approaches from the house and could not be taken by surprise.  "Why is
it," he began, "that I don’t see you at all any more—except at the
table?"

The fact that he did not pursue when she began to avoid had disappointed
her keenly.  But it had given her a better opinion of him.  It showed—so
she told herself, perhaps by way of consolation to vanity—that however
bad he might be he yet had redeeming reverence for purity.  But she had
long been weary of the dutiful struggle against his charm of the worldly
and the rich for her the unworldly and the poor.  So, her manner was not
wholly discouraging as she said, in reply to his respectfully regretful
question, "I’ve been very much occupied."

He watched her swift white fingers a while, then stared gloomily out
toward the lake.  She stole a pitying glance at him.  "Poor fellow!"
thought she.  "He’s suffering terribly to-day.  That dreadful woman!
How could Courtney, generous though she is, defend a creature who is
simply wrecking his life?"  As she had kept close watch on him all these
months, these signs of his sufferings were not new to her.  But never
had she seen them so movingly plain. "Poor fellow!" thought she.

Presently he said: "Won’t you talk to me?  I feel like a—a damned soul
to-day."

Helen thrilled.  He looked so distinguished, was so elegantly dressed in
his simple manly way, had that gloss, that sheen, which marks all the
kinds and conditions of anglers for the opposite sex.  "What shall I
talk about?" she asked.

Her sympathetic smile, showing her excellent teeth and lighting up her
dark eyes, changed for him her common-place query into a stimulating
exhibit of depth of soul. "Anything—anything," he said.  "You’ve got
such an honest, sweet voice that whatever you say makes one feel
better."

"What is troubling you?"

"Oh, I don’t want to talk about myself."

But her instinct told her he had brought his stained soul to
confessional.  "It might help you," she suggested, blushing at her own
boldness.

He looked gratefully at her and away.  "It seems to me," said he,
"you’ve been avoiding me.  Is it so?"

Helen bent her head low over her work.

"I suppose it was instinctive," he went on.  "To you, I’d seem—
Sometimes I feel that, if you and I had kept on with those talks we were
having last spring, things would have been different with me.  However,
it’s too late now."

Helen’s eyes filled.  "Oh, no.  It’s never too late," said she.

He sighed and rose—Courtney was coming toward them. Helen took no part
in the conversation that followed.  She was pondering the few
meaningless and youthful phrases he had uttered as if they were
freighted with wisdom and destiny.  And she continued to ponder them
after he and Courtney and Winchie went away for a drive to Wenona. The
more meaningless a thing is, the more food for thought to those
incapable of thinking.  When it is clear, it is grasped at once and the
incident closes; but let it have no meaning at all, and lives will be
devoted to cogitating upon it, and library shelves will groan with tomes
of exegesis. Helen found in Basil’s words what she wished to find—found
a plain mandate of duty to help him.  He couldn’t be so very
bad—probably not so bad as Richard was in his bachelor days, before
chemistry and Courtney calmed him. And look at Richard now!

She did not know the very particular dangers for Basil in drink.  But
she saw that he was taking a great deal more whisky and water than
formerly, and she felt that it had to do with his obviously desperate
depression.  Her one chance to see him, she knew, was when Courtney was
occupied; for, had she not led Courtney to think that she did not wish
to be left alone with him ever?  She decided it was best not to tell
Courtney she had changed her mind—somewhat—about him; Courtney would
misjudge, would think her careless about principle, weak,
love-sick—worst of all, would probably advise against her talking with
him. Thus it came to pass that when Courtney was safely occupied—with
callers, with Winchie, at sewing or painting or dressing—Helen put
herself oftener and oftener in such a position that Basil could find her
if he chose.  She did not dream that he also wished to be stealthy; she
thought the stealth was all on her own side—and he, seeing this, soon
pretended to himself that he thought so, too, and had not the slightest
sense of guilt toward Courtney.  It did not take him long to find a
satisfying explanation for Helen’s aversion to having it known that they
met alone; here, decided he, was another evidence of her modesty, her
delicate sensitiveness of the good woman who can’t bear being talked
about lightly—and, if they talked alone where others could see, there
would surely be joking and teasing and gossiping.

Once more habit gave illustration of its subtle grasping of ever more
and more power.  Before either was aware of it, they were meeting
clandestinely with clocklike regularity. And Helen’s life filled with
sunshine of the most delicious warmth and sparkle.  And Basil, keeping
steadily on at his drinking, and never relaxing in his devotion to the
sweet sin of which Courtney was the scarlet altar, reveled in those
agonies of a sense of utter depravity that are about the only charm of
wickedness.  "I am not fit to live," reflected he with comfortable
gloom, as he sat in his apartment alone drinking after an afternoon with
Helen and a late evening with Courtney.  Here was excellent excuse for
drinking and gloriously damning himself.  He did not go to bed until he
had finished the bottle and the last cigarette in the big silver box on
his table.  Also, between spasms of self-damning he had contrived to
finish a novel of intrigue that had as its villain-hero just such a
devil of a fellow as he felt he himself was—or was in delightful danger
of becoming.


How it ever befell he never could remember.  But the day came when he,
sitting with Helen in the summerhouse—the summerhouse!—found himself
holding her hand.  He stared at the pretty white hand, large and capable
yet feminine in every curve.  He noted that it was lying contentedly,
confidingly upon the brown of his palm.  He lifted his dazed eyes.  Her
lashes were down, her cheeks overspread with delicate color; her bosom,
like a young Juno’s, rose and fell with agitated irregularity.  It was
not poisonous mock morality, it was the decent human man underneath,
that sent an honestly horrified "Good God!" to his lips.  He laid her
hand gently in her lap, stood up, thrust his hands deep into his
trousers pockets.  His face was red with real shame.

"I’ve often told you," said he, "that I’m no fit companion for a pure
woman—that my life’s ruined past redeeming——"

"Don’t say those things," she implored.  "They hurt me—and they’re not
so.  I know _you_."

"Past redeeming," he repeated.  "It’s the God’s truth. I must keep away
from you.  I’ve no right to see you—to care for you—to tempt you to care
for me.  I can’t tell you—but if you knew, you’d loathe me as I loathe
myself."

"Do you—do you—"  Her voice faltered.  But she had wrought herself up to
such a romantic pitch about him, and his earnestness was so terrifying
and so real to her, that she dared to go on—"Do you care for some one
else?"  And she looked at him in all the beauty of her romance.

"I don’t know—I don’t know," he answered, in great agitation—physical,
though he of course fancied it moral. "Not with the love I might have
given a pure woman, if fate and my own vile weakness hadn’t conspired to
ruin me.... What am I saying?  I can’t talk to you about it. Think me as
bad as your imagination can picture—and I’m worse still."

She gave a low wail that came straight from her honest romantic young
heart and went straight to his heart.  He sat beside her, took her hand.
"Be merciful to me," he begged.  "At least I’m not so bad that I don’t
know goodness when I see it.  And you’ll always be the ideal of goodness
in my eyes—all I once sought in love—all I once deluded myself into
believing I had won."

She thrilled.  Those words made her feel that he belonged to _her_.  She
laid her other hand on his.  "Basil," she appealed, "you are young, and
brave, and noble.  You can free yourself—save yourself——"

He drew away, went to the rail of the pavilion, seated himself there.
"No," he said.  "I’m past saving. And—we must not meet any more."

"Why?" she asked.

"Because—I am not free—and never shall be."

"Is that true?"  Her eyes looked loving incredulity.

"I am more tightly bound—by honor and by—by habit—than if I were
married."

She gave a long sigh—of despair, she thought, but in reality of hope,
for, at least he was free.  Marriage was the only real bond.  As for
honor—what honor could there be in any tie not sanctioned by religion
and society?

"What a cur I am!" he exclaimed, put to shame by her sigh and her
forlorn expression.

"Please don’t!" she begged.  "I understand—as far as a girl could
understand such a thing.  And I know it’s not your fault.  And—even if
we can’t be anything more to each other, still I’m not sorry we’ve had
what we’ve had. I’m—I’m—glad!"

He felt the glory of her purity beaming upon him like heaven’s light on
the bleak, black-hot peaks of hell.  He longed to linger, and talk on
and on; but his sense of honor had reached the limit of its endurance
for that day.  Without touching her hand he said good-by as if they were
never to see each other again and went as if his heart were broken.

Thenceforth Helen let her longing for romance centre in him without
concealing the fact from herself—or from him. And her castle-building
had an energy it would never have had, if she had not imagined she felt
it was hopeless. Nothing so dynamic as the hopelessness that hopes.
Believing that he loved her, that she was his one chance of redemption,
she continued to give painstaking attention to her toilet, to refresh
her memory of those of his favorite poets with whom she was acquainted,
to learn lines from those she knew less well, and to put herself in his
way—always without forwardness.  And he continued to drift—held fast to
Courtney with senses so enchained that he would have fought against
release like an opium fiend for his drug; fascinated also by the woman
he could dream he ought to have loved, and might have loved.  Two
restraints he laid sternly upon himself.  Not to talk of love in a
_tête-à-tête_ with a woman—that would be impossible.  But he would see
that the talk was kept to the general, that it never adventured the
particular.  Also, he would never again so much as touch Helen’s hand
when they were alone.  Were he bred to be as expert at moral truth as at
moral sham, he might have found a key to his true state of soul in the
tantalization this self-restraint caused him to suffer.  There were
times when her physical contrast to Courtney was as alluring to his
keyed-up, supersensitized nerves as was her moral contrast to his morbid
moral sense.  If he had had the intelligence and concentration necessary
to candid self-analysis, he would have been startled—perhaps
benefited—by the discovery that he was in the way to become one of those
libertines who in all sincerity teach prayers to the innocence they are
plotting to debauch.

And all the time he was drinking more and more deeply—not for the moral
reasons he fancied, but for the practical physical reason that a
disordered nervous system craves the stimulants that will further
aggravate its disorder.  Helen’s father had carried his liquor badly; a
little was enough to upset him a great deal.  Basil was one of those men
who are able to drink heavily without showing it, even to the most
watchful eyes.  Often, when she had not the faintest suspicion he was in
liquor, he was in fact so far gone that he had to keep his surface
preternaturally solemn in order to conceal the disorder of his mind.

The day did not long delay when, under the influence of drink, he
suddenly seized her and kissed her.  She did not resist; but the shock
of the contact, instead of inflaming him, instantly restored him to his
senses.  He was conscience-stricken; also he saw the impossible
complications he was precipitating.  In shame and fright—in fright more
than shame—he fled from her presence.

So far as outward effect is concerned, the action is everything, the
motive nothing.  But so far as inward effect is concerned, the action is
nothing, the motive everything.  In action Basil and Courtney were
essentially the same—equal partners in intrigue.  But her motive of
seeking strength through love availed to hold her steady, even to lift
her up; while his motive of sensuality ever less and less refined and
redeemed by love was thrusting him down and down.




                                *XXIII*


Richard and Courtney were walking up from the laboratory together.  In
his abrupt fashion Richard broke the silence with: "I wonder if it isn’t
Helen that’s hanging back and not Gallatin.  She’s innocent as a baby,
but her experience with her father must have taught her about that one
thing."

"What one thing?" asked Courtney, startled out of her abstraction.

"Drinking.  Helen must have noticed how Gallatin’s mopping it up these
days."

"Nonsense," said Courtney sharply.  She was much irritated—as human
beings are extremely apt to be, when some matter they are making
determined efforts to ignore is forced on their attention.

"He was so drunk this morning that he had to go out and take the air.
That’s what made me think of it."

Drunk!  She winced at that bald revolting word.  She flamed at what she
tried to think was an injustice.  "This morning?" cried she.  "Why,
that’s absurd.  I’d have noticed it."

"You’re another innocent.  He carries a package well—always did."  There
Richard laughed at memories of his and Gallatin’s "wild-oats" days of
which he fancied Courtney knew nothing—and he would have been
panic-stricken had he thought there was danger of her finding out about
them.  "Yes," he went on, "Gallatin’s been going some for several weeks
now.  But this daytime drinking is a new development."

"I’m sure you’re mistaken," said Courtney, her irritation showing in her
color now.  "You both drink at supper."

"He about six to my two.  I never take more than two. And every once in
a while I see Jimmie or Bill carrying a case of bottles to or from his
apartments.  I can understand a boy’s doing that sort of thing.  A boy
wants to try everything.  But how a grown man can keep on at it is
beyond me.  Still, he hasn’t much mind.  He never says or thinks
anything he hasn’t got from somebody else.  But—women’d never notice
that."  This last sentence half to himself, not at all for her hearing.

Courtney was all a-quiver with anger.  For, his shrewd observation on
Basil’s mentality compelled her to admit to herself another truth,
indeed a whole swarm of truths, she had been hiding from herself—how
Basil’s conversation, when they were all together and the subject was
necessarily other than love, no longer seemed brilliant or especially
interesting even; how at the shop he made an extremely poor showing, was
now pupil, and rather backward pupil, to her who almost daily had to
cover up his blunders; how in helping her with the gardening he never
went beyond either approving her ideas or offering suggestions already
stated in the books; how she was constantly coming across things she had
thought original with him only because she happened not to have read the
books that contained them or to have known the phase of life in which
they were familiar commonplaces.  Angry though an untruth about anyone
or anything we love makes us, that anger is as equanimity itself beside
the anger roused by a disagreeable truth.

As they neared the house she quickened her pace, hurrying not so much
from Richard as from her own thoughts—the thoughts his words had
startled from unexpected lurking places as a sudden light sets bats to
whirling. Courtney was loyal through and through; also, she clung to
Basil like a shipwrecked sailor to a life raft.  The stronger the waves
of adverse destiny or of doubt, the fiercer she clung to her life raft.
In face of the clearest proof from without against Basil, she would have
shut her eyes and held fast to him.  Yet with devilish malice and
merciless persistence circumstances were now constantly taking her blind
resolute loyalty by surprise and forcing upon her exhibitions of him as
a shallow and sensual person.  A proud, intelligent woman’s love could
reconcile itself to either of these—to a shallow man whose passion was
simply symbol of deep and sincere love; or, to a sensual man whose
grossness was the coarse rich soil that sent up and nourished high
intelligence, fascinating and compelling.  But no woman worth while as a
human being could continue to love a shallow man treating her as mere
"symbol of the sensual side of life" because he was incapable of
appreciating any but physical qualities, and then simply as physical
qualities.

It was with a heart defiantly loving, defiantly loyal, that she met
Basil at eleven that night to admit him.  He had not appeared either at
the house or at the laboratory during the afternoon or for supper or
afterwards.  So, she had not seen him since Richard’s "attack on him
behind his back"—for, she had succeeded in convincing herself that
Richard’s accusations were an outcropping of prejudice against him.  She
felt humble toward him because she had listened without bursting out in
his defense—this, though to defend would have been the height of stupid
imprudence. As he entered the door she softly opened, he lurched against
her, stumbled over the rug, saved himself by catching hold of her and
almost bringing her down.  A wave of suspicion, of sickening fear and
repulsion shuddered through her. But she frowned herself down, took him
firmly by the arm.

"Be careful," she whispered.  "The floor was polished only yesterday."

He mumbled something affectionate and without waiting for her to close
the door, embraced her.  From him exhaled the powerful odor of mixed
tobacco and whisky that proclaims the drunken man to the most
inexperienced, to those blindest of the blind—the blind who dare not
see. She gently released herself.  Several times of late he had come to
her in almost this condition; she had forced herself to deny, to excuse,
to minimize.  Now, however, it was impossible for her to risk admitting
him; and also, she suddenly realized she had reached the breaking point
of her courage to keep up her self-deception.  "You must go at once,"
she said.

"Why?" he demanded in a hoarse whisper.  His befuddled mind reverted to
Helen as if Courtney knew about her.  "What right have you got to be
jealous, if I’m not?"

She did not puzzle over this remark.  "Basil, you must go at once
because you’ve been drinking too much."  The danger was too imminent to
be trifled with in diplomatic phrases.

He stood, swaying unsteadily, his head hanging.  "If you think so—" he
muttered.

She urged him gently toward the door.

"I—I beg your pardon," he mumbled.  "I—I guess you’re right."

He backed two steps.  As soon as he was clear of the door she closed and
locked it.  Slowly she went upstairs, dropped wearily into bed.  She lay
quiet a few minutes, staring at the arc of the night lamp.  Then on an
impulse from an instinct that could not be disobeyed, she rose, took a
dark dressing gown, wrapped it round her.  She glided along the hall,
descended the stairs, opened the lake-front door.  Closing it behind
her, she stood at the edge of the veranda.  The sky was black; a few
drops of rain were falling.  She made an effort, ran down the steps,
hurried across the lawn and along the path to the Smoke House. The
entrance door to the apartment stairway was open. She hesitated, slowly
ascended.  He did not appear at the sound of her steps.  His bedroom
door was open.  She glanced in.  His bed was turned down, his pajamas
lay ready upon the folded-over covers.  But he was not there. She went
on to the door of his sitting room.  It too was open.  At the table desk
and facing the door he sat, half-collapsed on the chair, one hand round
a tall glass of whisky and water, the bottle and a carafe at his elbow.
Though her mind was on him, her eyes took in and forced upon her every
tiny detail of the room; she had made it over that his surroundings
might always remind him of her. He lifted his heavy head, blinked
stupidly at her.  She noted his face with the same morbid acuteness to
detail—his swollen eyes, his puffy lips, the veins in his forehead, his
brows knitted in a foolishly solemn expression.  Never had he seemed so
homely, since her first glance at him when he came there a stranger.

After a moment of dazed sodden staring at her, he remembered his
manners, rose not without difficulty and stood, stiff and unsteadily
swaying.  "Give me some of the whisky," said she, advancing.  "I feel
sort of queer."  She dropped to the chair he had just left and took up
his glass. "May I have your drink?" she asked, and without waiting for a
reply drank eagerly.  Color returned to her cheeks, and her eyes became
less heavy and dull.  "I’m better—very much better," she declared, as
she set the glass down empty.

He had seated himself lumpishly on the sofa.  They remained silent,
gazing out through the open window into the darkness and hearing the
soothing musical plash of rain on lake.  In upon them poured a freshness
rather than a breeze and the pleasant odor of drenching foliage. "As I
lay there thinking," she said presently, "it came to me that I mustn’t
let this night pass without seeing you and making it smooth and straight
between us."

The shock of her appearing had for the moment beaten down his
intoxication.  It was now boiling up again, heating his nerves and his
imagination, though he seemed sober and self-possessed.  "All right,"
said he.  "I know you didn’t mean to insult me, and I’ll forget it."

She gazed quickly at him in amazement, started to speak, checked
herself.

"But I want to tell you," he went on, his tone and gestures
forcible-feeble, "I want to tell you this business of my being shut out
has got to stop.  You must arrange for Vaughan to come down here to
live, and for me to take his rooms up at the house."

This demand seemed to her as utterly unlike him as the dictatorial tone
in which it was made.  To condemn him—no, more—not to love him the more
tenderly—because he was in this mood of distracted desperation would be
unworthy of the love she professed.  She crushed down her sense of
repulsion, went to him, laid her cheek against his hair.  "My love," she
murmured.  "We mustn’t ever forget that we have only each other.  We’ll
never let any misunderstanding come between us, no matter how blue we
get."  And she turned his head and kissed him.

With an intoxicated man’s fickleness, he switched abruptly from anger to
sentiment.  His eyes became moist and shiny.  A sensual drunken smile
played round his heavy mouth.  She saw though she was trying hard not to
see.  He reached round and drew her toward his lap. She gently resisted,
while she was nerving herself to submit—would it not be a very poor sort
of love that would let itself be chilled by a mood—a mood in which all
love’s warmth, all love’s gentleness were needed as they are not needed
when everything is pleasant and easy?

The tears of self-pity welled into his eyes.  "God, how low I’ve sunk!"
He got himself on his uncertain legs, arranged his features into a
caricature of an expression of dignified command.  "I want you to send
Helen—Miss March—away," he said, waving his finger at her.  "She’s a
pure woman.  She mustn’t be contaminated."

She gazed at him in horror.  "Basil!" she gasped.

"Yes—I mean it.  Oh, you understand.  I’m not fit to ’sociate with
her—and neither are you."

With a wild cry, she turned to fly.  He lurched forward, caught her by
the arm.  "But we’re just about fit for each other," he said.  "And
that’s the truth—if I am drunk."  He nodded at her.  "I should say,
’That’s the truth _because_ I am drunk.’  It’s giving me the courage to
speak out a few things that’ve been gnawing at my insides for weeks."
And his fingers clasped her arm like steel nippers.

"Basil!  You’re hurting me."

"That’s what I feel like doing."  And in his eyes as in his fingers
there was revealed the sheer sensual ferocity that drink had freed of
the shame which at other times held it in restraint.

She hung her head.  In a low voice she stammered, "You’re making me feel
there isn’t any love for me anywhere in your heart."

"Love?" he said, swaying to and fro and opening and closing his eyes
stupidly.  "Love.  Oh, yes there is.  Yes, indeed.  Sometimes I think
not, but it isn’t so.  It’s because I love you that I go crazy at the
thought that I’m sharing you."

"_Sharing me!_"  She wrenched herself free, put her arm over her eyes as
if she could thus hide from herself the sight of his soul which in
drunken abandon he had completely unmasked.

"Don’t be frightened," he maundered on.  "I’m a man of honor—’honor
rooted in dishonor’ as Tennyson says. I’ll not go.  I’ll submit to
it—all right.  Love gives a man a stomach for anything."

She wished to fly, but her legs would not carry her. She had to stay—and
listen.

"How I’ve been dragged down!  How a woman can drag a man down!  Not
Helen—no—she’s an angel.  But those good women never are as fascinating
as you others.... Love?"  He beamed upon her like a drunken satyr.
"Let’s love and be happy.  To hell with everything but love."

As she listened and looked she, for the first time since they had been
lovers, felt that she had sinned—had sinned without justification.  The
judgment of guilt dazzled and stunned her as the sun’s full light eyes
from which the scales have just fallen.  She stood paralyzed, yet
wondering how she could remain erect under the weight of her
vileness—for, her sin seemed as heavy and as vile as ever celibate
fanatic asserted.  When her lover moved to embrace her, she, with the
motion of shrinking from him, found she had strength and power to fly.
She rushed from the room, he stumbling after her, and crying "Courtney!
Don’t get jealous and go off mad——"




                                 *XXIV*


She knew the truth at last—the whole truth—what he was in mind and in
heart, what his love was, what he in his inmost soul thought about her,
about himself.  The man who could believe he was sharing her could not
but be shallow indeed, stupid, and also incapable of understanding the
meaning of the word love; the man who could keep on with a woman he
believed he was "sharing," must be sunk in a wallow of sensuality—and as
weak as low.  She knew the truth.  Hearing she might have disputed and
in time denied.  But there was, and would be, no evading the records
stamped clear and indelible upon her memory by that sensual, maudlin
face.  To falsify those records was beyond even a proud, lonely, loving
woman’s all but limitless powers of self-deception in matters of the
heart.  The coarseness of that self-revelation of his was the liquor;
but the revelation itself was the man.  He did not love; he lusted.  He
did not love; he despised—her and himself.  He did not love—and he never
had loved.

There is in every one of us a chamber where vanity and hope live and
ever conspire to deceive, and if possible, destroy us.  From that secret
chamber she now wrenched an amazing secret.  She discovered that from
the beginning—yes, from the beginning—she, determined to satisfy the
craving of elemental flesh and blood, had been lying to herself about
Basil Gallatin.  Passion had taken sly advantage of her loneliness and
her longing for sympathy and companionship; it had beguiled her
imagination into creating out of the very ordinary materials of his true
personality the lover she had been adoring.  One by one she took out and
reëxamined all her memory plates of him. Now, a memory plate is like any
other photographic plate; it has a surface picture and it also yields to
a close scrutiny a thousand details which do not appear upon the
surface. Long before she finished, she was realizing that she had all
along, with the deliberate craft of self-deception, been hiding from
herself the trick her feelings were practicing upon her intelligence.
Basil—pleasing manners and dress, amiable disposition, animalism
agreeably disguised by education—Basil had been plausible enough to pass
muster with her, ready and eager to be deluded because of her craving
for love.  True, he had posed to a certain extent. But he was not really
responsible for the fraud.  The blame was hers—all hers.

But disillusion no more destroys a love longing than lack of food and
drink destroys hunger and thirst.  High above moans of shame over the
pitiful collapse of her romance rose the defiant clamors of hunger and
thirst. They had been lovers, he and she; and that fact in itself was a
bond which a woman, at least a woman of her temperament of fidelity,
could not easily break.  She feared when he, sober and a gentleman once
more, sweet and winning, came to her and pleaded for forgiveness she
would forgive—would in her loneliness and heart hunger take what she
could get rather than have nothing and the ache of nothingness.  It
is—at least, it has been, up to and into the present time—second nature
to woman to depend upon a man, to select some one man, the best
available, and stake everything upon him.  Basil Gallatin was that man
for her.  And—not in novels, but in life—before any woman, however high
minded, goes away to utter aloneness from a man who cares for her, he
must have disclosed some traits more abhorrent than any such human
traits as those of Basil.  Yes—human.  Was it his fault that he had not
given her the kind of love she wanted?  Was it not probably her fault
that he had not been inspired to that kind of love?  Perhaps, too, the
love of any man, could it be seen in the nakedness of drunkenness, would
be much like Basil’s.  "I’m only a woman," she said.  "I mustn’t forget
that.  I’ve no right to expect much."  And then she shuddered; for in
her very ears was the sound of those cold rains falling day and night
upon her loneliness and despair.

She saw herself accepting; for, a great deal less than half a loaf is
better than no bread.  And if she accepted, she must adapt herself—must
force herself to acquire a liking for what she must eat or go altogether
hungry.  She saw herself wending down and down—to the level at which he
had from the beginning thought her arrived.  She looked all around.
Nothing—no one—to save her.  For, what could she hope from Richard?—from
any man?  Was not Basil giving about the best man had to offer woman in
the way of association?  There was the Richard sort of man—an
abstraction—an impossibility.  There was the Shirley Drummond sort of
man—a human incarnation of Old Dog Tray—equally impossible.  There was
the third sort of man—the Basil sort, somewhere between the two
impossibilities.  Life must be lived, and with human beings.  Of the
three available kinds of associates, was not the Basil sort the most
livable?  Rather Basil than being frozen to death by a Richard or bored
to death by a Shirley.  The conclusion seemed cynical; but there was no
cynicism in the sad woman who faced that conclusion.

She did not go down to breakfast; and Basil, she learned, kept away
also.  When he did not appear at dinner she knew he had determined to
wait until he should surely see her alone.  The emotion that stirred in
her because his place at the table was vacant gave her more and sadder
light upon how little the heart heeds the things that impress the mind
and the self-respect.  About the middle of the afternoon she was at the
small antique desk in the corner of her sitting room, trying to write a
letter. But the charm of the day, the beauty of full-foliaged trees, of
lake and cloudless sky seen through the creeper-framed window, would not
let her write.  As she gazed, her unhappiness calmed and all her senses
flooded with the joy that laughs in sunbeams, in light and shadow
floating on the grass, in flight and song of birds, in grace and color
and perfume of flowers, the joy that mocks at moral struggle and
flutters alluringly the gay banner of the gospel of eat, drink and be
merry.

As she took her pen to go on with the letter, Lizzie appeared in the
hall doorway.  "Mr. Vaughan asked me to tell you," she said, "that he’d
gone out and might not be back for supper."

"Very well," said Courtney, not turning round.  It flitted across her
mind that this was an extraordinary message for Richard to send—Richard
who came and went as he pleased and sent no word when he was not coming
to dinner or supper.  "Where’s he gone?" she asked—an extraordinary
question from her to match the extraordinary message from him.

"He was in a hurry and didn’t say," replied Lizzie. "I’ll find out."

"Oh, no.  It doesn’t matter."

Lizzie went, and in her dreaming and thinking Courtney soon forgot the
incident.  Again Lizzie’s voice interrupted—"Mr. Vaughan’s gone to see
old Nanny."

"Nanny!" said Courtney.  She never thought of the old woman except as
the memorandum of her pension check appeared every three months in the
household accounts.

"Yes.  She’s dying.  She sent for him.  Such dreadful roads too."

Courtney’s pen halted on its way to the ink well.  The room seemed to
her to have become terribly still.

"She sent him word," Lizzie went carelessly on, and her voice seemed to
come from a distance, through a profound hush, "that she had something
on her conscience and couldn’t go without clearing it.  I reckon she’s
gone clean crazy."

It was not fear that made nerve and muscle tense. It was not
self-control that held her motionless.  The peril was upon her; there
was no time to waste in emotion.  All along, she had pretended to
herself that Nanny knew nothing, had at worst a dim suspicion.  Now, she
realized that she had always feared the old woman had seen and had
heard.  And those words of Lizzie’s made it impossible for her to doubt
what was about to occur.  No time for terror, for hysteria or fainting
or futile moaning.  Her whole being concentrated on the one idea, What
shall I do? Calmly she said to Lizzie, "Has he gone?"

"Ten minutes ago—maybe fifteen."

"Did he take the motor?"

"Yes, ma’am.  She’s near dead.  He went in a great hurry."

Idle then to think of overtaking him, of bringing him back with a story
that Winchie was missing, was perhaps drowned in the lake.  Her mind—it
had never been clearer or steadier—gave Richard up for the moment,
turned to another phase.  "Where is Mr. Gallatin?" she asked.

"Out on the lake.  Winchie’s with him—fishing."

"When they come in, please tell him I wish to see him at once."  The
events of last night were as if they had not been.  Wounds closed up
like magic; once more it was she and Basil her lover united against the
whole world.

"I can call him from the wall," suggested Lizzie.

"Yes—please do."  She dipped the pen as if about to go on with the
interrupted letter.  Lizzie went.  She laid the pen down, leaned back in
the chair, clasped her hands behind her head, gazed unseeingly into the
huge tree almost directly before the window.  The irony of it! Through
Nanny whom they had forgotten!  The blow was about to fall—utter
ruin—the end of love—of life probably.  A few hours and there would be a
convulsion of the most awful passions.  She looked round.  Everything
calm, bright, beautiful.  Reason told her what was about to occur; but
there are calamities which the imagination cannot picture, and this was
one of them....  Should she tell Basil? "Nanny may be dead before
Richard gets to her.  If I tell Basil—and Richard comes, only
suspicious—Basil’s manner may confirm him."  It was still more
significant that it did not enter her head as even a possibility that
Basil might be able to help her devise some plan to avert or to mitigate
the blow....  In the midst of her debate whether to tell him, she
suddenly gave a terrible cry, sprang to the window, her expression
wildly disheveled.  The thought had flashed, "If Richard hears and
believes, he will _kill_ Basil!"

Before she reached the balcony rail, reason took her by the shoulder,
drew her back to her chair.  "I must keep my head!" she exclaimed aloud.
And she fought down and triumphed over the terror that had all but
mastered her.  At Gallatin’s step on the threshold she did not turn.
"Shut the door," she said in her usual voice.  Then, after the sound of
its closing, "Nanny, on her deathbed, has sent for him—to confess
something.  He’s gone to her."

She heard him slowly cross the room, knew he was standing at the window.
After a while she stole a glance at him.  His skin was gray, his profile
set; there were deep lines round his mouth.  She liked his face, it was
so manly; a wave of love surged out from her heart.  "How long shall we
have to wait?" he asked.  The voice, though wholly unlike his own, had
no note of cowardice in it.

"He’s been gone about half an hour."

"Only half an hour!"

She saw the sweat burst out upon his forehead.  She saw the muscles of
his face trembling.  There was agony in his eyes—not fear, but that
horror of suspense which makes the trapped soldier rush upon the
bayonet, makes the man on the scaffold assist the leisurely hangman.

Silence, except the chirping of the birds.  A bumblebee buzzed almost
into his face; he did not wince.  A black-and-gold butterfly fluttered
in at the window on the other side of the desk, hovered, settled upon
the lid of the stationery box, rested with wings together as one.  She
turned her eyes from him to watch it, said absently:

"You will have to go at once."

She heard him turn full toward her.  She was expecting that quick
movement, but she could not help shrinking a little.  However she went
on evenly: "You can cross in the motor boat, take a trap at Wenona,
catch the four-o’clock express at Fenton."

"I deserve that," he said, and she knew he was referring to last night.

She hesitated, went straight at it.  "I’d forgotten last night since
Lizzie told me about Nanny.  It’s wiped out. So, you need think only of
going."

"What are you talking about?" he exclaimed.  "I—go?"

She was ready.  She turned upon him a look of well-simulated surprise.
Then—  "Oh!" she cried.  "I’ve been thinking it out, and you haven’t.
At first glance it does look as if we ought to face it together.  But as
you consider it you’ll see you’ve simply got to go."

He seated himself, took out his cigarette case, lighted a cigarette.
"If I go anywhere it will be in his direction, to shorten the wait."

"Listen," said she, leaning toward him, her forearms on the desk, her
hands clasped.  "He’ll have but one idea—to kill you.  If you’re here,
the very sight of you will set him wild.  He’ll kill you—how can you
defend yourself?"

"I can’t.  Vaughan has the right to my life."

She winced at this unconscious ugly reminder of what he really thought
of their romance.  She waved her hand as if brushing something away.
"No matter about that," said she.  "I’m thinking how to save Winchie
from disgrace—and my own life.  If you’re here, there’s no hope. If
you’re gone, he’ll have the chance to reflect.  And I shall know what to
say and how to say it."

"I don’t believe she knew anything."

"Basil!" His eyes shifted.  "Don’t you _remember_?"

Both were hearing the mad flapping of that frightened bird in the copse
round the summerhouse.  She shivered; he moved uneasily.  "Even if she
knew," he objected, "she may be dead or in the stupor of death before he
gets to her."

"Then he’ll hear nothing, and there’s no reason why you shouldn’t go.
I’ll say you got a telegram from your mother——"

"If he comes merely suspecting and uneasy, and I’m gone——"

"Still he’d not be sure," she interrupted.  "And if he were, he’d not
have the sight of you to inflame him."  She rose.  "There’s no time to
waste."

He settled himself.  "I shall not go.  We face him together."

The clock on the chimney-piece struck.  She gave a cry, rushed to him.
"Basil—my love!" she implored. "If you love me, go—go!"

He pressed his hands to her cheeks tenderly, smiled at her with the
gentle tolerance of superior male for female. "I understand, dear.  This
is like you.  But my honor will not let me go."

She released his hand, stood gazing at him.  In the beginning she had
urged only because she had wished to save him.  But she had been
convinced by her own arguments; and it amazed her that he was refusing
to see what was so clear.  "You—will—not—go?" she said.

"No, Courtney.  I cannot."

She brushed the strays of hair from her brow.  She laughed scornfully,
with a contemptuous shrug.  "Whether you two men kill each other or are
only wounded, still Winchie and I will be disgraced.  You may be only
wounded—may get over it in a week or so—or you two may only have a
vulgar fight—with the servants looking on.  In any case _I_ am done
for."

He was like a horse when the spur is bidding it advance and the curb is
bidding it halt.  "If I stay," he cried, "you’ll despise me.  If I go,
you’ll despise me."

"If you stay you destroy me.  If you go, I can save myself.  Will you go
or not?  Oh, after last night—this on top of that—  And, after last
night, you can debate whether or not I’ll despise you!  Go, I tell you!
You couldn’t sink any lower than you have—and you may redeem yourself."
They were facing each other, he white before her scorn and fury.  "But
not," she went on, "if to what you said and did then you add debating a
point of cheap pose when I and my child are at stake.  What a shallow,
vain creature you are!"

"Do you mean these things?  Or are you only pretending, to make me fly
and save myself?"

"I mean every word.  In spite of last night, of all it taught me, I was
still hoping—or, trying to hope.  But now—  Thank God I had Winchie when
I met you, and wasn’t free to make an utter fool of myself.  A man who
could betray his friend for lust, and then betray his mistress for
vanity!"

His eyes blazed mingled hate and passion at her.  "But you’ll go with me
now!" he cried, in triumphant fury. "Yes, we’ll take that train
together.  The jig’s up, and, damn you, you witch, you’ve got to go with
me."

She was shaking with fright.  For the moment she could think of no
answer.  She was under the spell of the terrible expression of his eyes.

"If he comes looking for some one to kill, he’ll kill you if he can’t
get us both.  So—we go together, or die together, as you please."

"Very well," said she, seating herself.  "Oh, how like you this is!  You
know that if we fly, my boy is smirched for life—and I too.  You know
that if I stay, I may save everything—even your life.  If we went,
Richard would never rest till he’d hunted us down and killed us."

"I’ve lost you," said he sullenly.  "I don’t care what happens.  I feel
like killing you myself."  He straightened up.  "Why not?" he cried.
"Kill you, then myself—get it all over with."

The silence was broken by a shout from Winchie playing with the
neighbor’s children on the lawn.  That sound compelled her to another
effort.  She went to Basil, laid her hands gently on his shoulders.
"Basil," she pleaded, tears in her eyes, in her voice, "for my boy’s
sake—for my sake—go!  Now that you think about it you can’t but see it’s
the decent, the honorable thing to do.  Let’s not quarrel—we who have
been so much to each other.  Go and let us save everything."

He looked into her eyes, and she knew that if he had drunk as much that
day as he did the day before, he would have killed her and himself.  But
she saw that he, sober, was hesitating, was moved by her appeal to his
generous, kind nature, overflowing with sentimentality.  "Dear," she
said, "you can row out on the lake.  And if everything’s all right I’ll
hang something white on this shutter here. Then you can come back.  Even
if he comes home suspicious he’ll not think it strange that you’re on
the lake late."

"But he may come to kill, and before I could get back——"

"But he will not kill me, I tell you.  I’m ’only a woman.’  I know him.
You know, too.  And if he would, how could you save me?  Would I want to
live disgraced?"  The clock struck again.  She gave a scream, flung her
arms round his neck.  "Save me, Basil!  Go—quick!—quick!"

After the frightful things she had said to him and he to her, there was
left him only the choice between going and killing her and himself.  On
the threshold he, with tears in his eyes, embraced her and kissed her.
"God help me, I don’t know what to do," he said.  "I’ll go.  If it turns
out wrong, remember how you perplexed me—and try to forgive me, dear."

He was so genuine, so manly and loving and she felt so grateful to him
that her own eyes filled and she gave him her lips with her heart in
them.

She stood at the window; she walked up and down the balcony.  But she
watched the lake in vain.  Five minutes ten—fifteen, and no
Basil—Winchie came with his usual rush, flung himself into the hammock.
"What is it, mamma?" he asked presently.

She startled, turned on him with eyes wild.  "Oh!" she gasped, her hand
on her heart.  "I didn’t know you were there."

"Are you watching for Mr. Gallatin?"

"Why, dear?"

"Because, if you are, he came in with me a long time ago and isn’t out
there any more."

A silence, she trying to keep her gaze off the lake.

"I like him," the boy went on.  "At least, some better than I did.  He
knows a lot about fishing.  When papa blows himself up and never comes
down any more, as Jimmie says he will some day, I think I’ll let Mr.
Gallatin stay on with us."

Courtney scarcely heard.  She was grinding her palms together and
muttering incoherently when at last she saw his boat pushing leisurely
in the direction of Wenona.  She drew a long breath.  But as the boat
glided farther and farther away, her sick heart failed her.  She felt
abandoned—and afraid.  For, she had not told the truth when she said she
knew Richard would not kill her.

Winchie stayed on, talking incessantly and no more disturbed by her
inattention than babbling brook or trilling bird by lack of audience.
His chatter fretted her like the rapping of a branch on the window of an
invalid.  But she would not send him away.  If Richard should come,
Winchie’s being there would halt him—perhaps, just long enough.  After
an hour Winchie grew tired of talking and ran off to play.  She did not
detain him—why, she did not know—probably, because to detain him would
have been to encourage a fear that must be defied if the coming battle
for Winchie and reputation and life was not to be lost before it began.
She must not seem to be afraid.  That would be fatal.  And the sure way
to seem unafraid was to be unafraid.

She paced the floor.  She watched the distant boat with its single
occupant.  She sat and tried to finish her letter. She roamed through
the house.  "I’ll meet him in the grounds," decided she—and, compelling
herself to walk slowly, she paced the road between gates and house—up
and down, up and down.  Back to the house again, to her room.  "Yes,
we’ll not wait supper," she said, in answer to Lizzie’s inquiry.  At
supper, the sound of Helen’s and Winchie’s voices rasped on her nerves.
"Will he never come?" she muttered.  And without explanation, she left
the table, went again to her sitting room.

"Are you ill, dear?" asked Helen, putting her head in at the door.

"No," replied she, curtly.

Helen went, but Winchie came.  "You must hear my prayer, mamma."

"Helen taught it to you.  Let her hear it."

"No.  She’s busy downstairs, and I’m in a hurry to go to sleep."

"Then—just say it by yourself."

"It seems foolish to say it, with nobody to listen."

"Very well."

She sat on the floor beside his bed.  He knelt before her, eyes closed,
hands folded as Helen had taught him. She was
listening—listening—listening.  "If he came now—" thought she—one of
those sardonic fancies that leer even from a coffin.  She stayed on with
the boy, getting him to tell her stories, she the while listening,
listening for sounds on the drive, on the stairs—and hearing only the
sound of the seconds splashing one by one into eternity. Winchie fell
asleep.  She kissed him, fled from his room with a choke in her throat.
She composed herself, descended to the kitchen.  Lizzie and Mazie were
there, and as she opened one door Jimmie entered by the other.

She became suddenly weak, but contrived to say to him, "Didn’t you bring
Mr. Vaughan back?"

"Yes, ma’am—an hour ago—most.  He got down at the gate and went to the
Smoke House.  He wanted to see Mr. Gallatin—said for me to send him if
he was up here. But Mr. Gallatin’s went out in a boat and ain’t in yet.
Guess he’s spending the evening over to Wenona."

She closed the door, leaned weak and sick against the wall of the
passageway.  Richard knew!  Back to her room.  She walked, she sat, she
lay down.  She watched the clock.  The moments were aging her like
years.  Each second was dropping into eternity with a boom that echoed
in her shuddering heart.  She looked at herself in the mirror.  Skin
ashen; lines round her mouth—the gauntness of age peering ghastlily
through her youth like a skeleton with a fresh young mask over its face
bones.  A black band all round each eye, the eyes blazing out
feverishly.  "He must not see me like this," she cried.  She went down
to the dining room, trembling and listening at every step, like a thief.
She drank a glass of brandy at the sideboard, fled to her rooms again.
She took the pitcher of ice water into the bath room, emptied it into
the bowl of the stationary stand, bathed her face.  She pressed a lump
of ice against her blue-black burning lids.  "Why don’t I wake?" she
said, for throughout she had the sense of unreality that attends but
does not lessen an impending horror.

Twelve o’clock—"I’ll go to bed.  I’ll take Winchie into bed with me.
Not because I’m afraid but because I’m lonely."  She felt a great
longing to live.  She felt young and strong, and the look and the odor
of life were delicious. If only this crisis could be passed!  No matter
how—no matter how!  "I’ve the right to live!"  She lifted Winchie gently
from his bed, carried him to hers.  The warmth of his vivid young body
stole sweet and sad through her thin nightgown, through her flesh into
her heart.  He half awakened, half put out his arms to embrace her,
murmured "Mamma"—was asleep again.  She sobbed a little in self-pity,
dried her tears for shame, lay down beside her boy, nestled one hand
under his body.

For a moment she felt better.  Then up she rose, bore him back to his
own bed, returned.  But as she was closing the door, she hesitated—"It’s
not hiding behind him. If I have him with me, it may save him from
disgrace."  She was about to open the door, when she turned away
abruptly.  "No!  If I did that, I’d deserve to die.  Why should I hide
behind Winchie?  Why should I hide, at all? I may have done wrong, but I
wronged myself, not Richard.  I may have done wrong.  But I had the
right to do wrong."  She put out the light, lay down again, somewhat
calmer.  Suddenly she sat bolt upright in the darkness. She had
forgotten all about Basil!  Had he rowed back, had he and Richard met——

The hall door of her bedroom opened softly—she had intentionally left it
unlocked.  She sank back against the pillows.  Her heart stooped beating
as she listened.  No further sound.  When she could endure no longer,
she said, "Who is it?"

Dick’s voice, saying, "Oh, you aren’t asleep."

"What time is it?"

"About half past one."  It was Richard’s voice, yet not his.

A long silence.  She could hear her heart beating—the ticking of the
little clock on the night stand—the murmur of the breeze among the
boughs—and another sound—she thought it must be the beating of his
heart.

Then he: "May I turn up the light—just for a minute?"

"I’ll turn it up."  She did so, and as she lay down again saw with a
swift furtive glance that his face was haggard, that his eyes seemed
deep sunk in black pits, and that he was gazing at the floor.  And still
she had the sense of unreality, of the dream that will pass.

He advanced a step or two.  She felt him intently looking at her.  Again
that breathless silence.  Then he gave a great sigh, bent over her,
gently kissed her hair.  "What glorious hair you have," he said.  "And
what a pure, innocent face.  It’s only necessary to see your face, to
know you are good."

She wondered why her skin was not burning, why her lips did not open and
her voice cry out.  "But when _this_ is past," she said to herself, "no
more lies—never again!"

"Good night," he was saying.

"Good night," she murmured, the sense of unreality, of the passing
dream, stronger than ever.

She heard him cross the room, heard the door close behind him.  She
leaped from her bed to lock it.  As she was halfway across the room, the
door opened.  Mechanically she snatched from the sofa a dark kimona,
drew it round her.  "I forgot to turn out your light," he said. "Oh—it
was the night-stand light, wasn’t it?"  Then she had the sense of
impending disaster and—  His whole expression, body as well as face,
changed.  His eyes seemed starting from his head.  "You—you"—he
stammered—"That night when I came home unexpectedly—"  He flung out his
arms, dropped heavily to the chair behind him. "It’s true!" he gasped.
"It’s _true_!"

The kimona that had helped to remind him and to betray her had dropped
from her listless shoulders to the floor.  She seated herself on the
edge of the bed, her hands clasped loosely in her lap.  She looked
calmly at him. She now felt as much her normal self as she had up to the
moment when Lizzie brought her the news that he had gone to Nanny.  She
was glad the crisis had come. More—she was glad he knew the truth.
"Now," she said to herself, with dizzy elation, "I’ll either die or
begin to live. ’Nothing is settled, till it’s settled right.’  My life
will be settled right, at last."

He made several attempts to look at her, could not lift his eyes.  As
they sat there she seemed innocence and he guilt.  "Nanny told me," he
said, as if feeling round for a beginning.  Then, after a long wait,
"She said she couldn’t die with it on her conscience.  I thought her
mind was wandering—but—somehow—I couldn’t—"  He broke off.  Another long
wait.  He ended it with the question she had been expecting:
"Where’s—he?"

"Gone."

Another pause, longer.  "I’m stunned—stunned."  He stared at the floor,
his head between his hands, his elbows on his knees.  "So—he ran away."

"I sent him."

"I am glad.  I might have—"  He did not finish. "I’m stunned," he
muttered.

She clasped her hands round one knee—a favorite attitude of hers—and
waited.  It was a time for her to be silent, to watch, to wait.  A word,
any word, from her might cause the explosion.

"Why did you send him away?" he asked.  It was as if he were talking
with a stranger about an indifferent matter.

"Because he has nothing to do with this.  It’s between you and me."

Their eyes met.  "Nothing to do with this?" he repeated, as if trying to
understand.

"It’s between you and me," she repeated.

His eyes turned away, as if he were reflecting upon this.  Silence
again.  Then he: "I don’t know what to do.  I know it’s so, but I can’t
believe it.  It’s not like you—not at all."  He looked at her.  She met
his gaze steadily. His eyes shifted.  "Not at all," he repeated.  He was
still talking as if to a stranger.  She understood why; it would have
been impossible for any force, even such a discovery as this, to
galvanize into a living personality, with a mind to think and to will,
the woman who had for six years been mere incident in his busy life,
"Not at all like you," he again repeated.  "Yet—why did I feel it was
true as soon as Nanny told me?"

She remained silent and motionless.

"Why don’t you speak?" he demanded, trying to rouse himself to reality.
"Why don’t you defend yourself?"

So long as she did not defend, he could not attack.  She did not answer.

"You do not deny.  You admit?"

She was silent.

"He is safe, so long as he keeps away.  You need not be afraid to
confess that he took advantage of a moment of weakness."  It was an
offer of a defense he would accept.

She refused it instantly.  "That is not true," she said.

"Yes, it is," he insisted.  "He took advantage of my absence——"

"What I did," she interrupted, "was of my own free will—was what I felt
I had the right to do."

His eyes lifted to hers in amazement.  Again they found her gaze steady
and direct.  "Don’t you realize what you’ve done?" he exclaimed.  Such
an expression as hers must mean either innocence or a shamelessness
beyond belief.

"Yes, I realize," she answered in the same calm colorless tone in which
she had spoken all her few words.

"How like a child you are," said he gently—and child-like she certainty
looked, sitting there all in white, so small and lovely and sweet, with
her heavy braids twisted round her little head, giving her appearance a
touch of quaintness, of precocious gravity.  "A mere child.  You don’t
even understand what you’re accused of.  It simply can’t be true—it—"
He started up.  "My God—if only I hadn’t seen that room that night!"
And she knew he was seeing what she was seeing—Basil’s disheveled
room—and she in it, like it.  "Courtney!  Courtney!  How could you—how
could you!"  And down he sank with face buried in his hands and
shoulders heaving.

She hung her head in shame.  In vain she reminded herself how he had
refused to treat her as a human being, how he had spurned all her
appeals, how he had refused to let her live either with him or without
him—would give her neither marriage nor divorce.  All in vain.  Before
his grief she could feel only her own deceit.  It might be true that he
had not allowed her to be honest; it was also true that she had not been
honest.

When she looked at him again, she was fascinated by the expression of
his long aristocratic profile—stern, inscrutable.  "I realize," he
presently said, "that I don’t know or understand you at all.  But of one
thing I’m certain—that you are not a bad woman.  I’ve been recalling you
from the beginning—from our childhood even.  You never were bad.  I can
remember only sweet and beautiful things about you."

She covered her face with her arm.  "Don’t!" she murmured.

"I wasn’t saying that to make you ashamed," he hastened to explain.  "I
can’t help feeling that somehow or other I am more to blame than you.
But that’s aside. The main thing is, we must both do the best we can to
straighten things out.  Isn’t it so?"

To straighten things out!  Not to rave and curse and kill—not scandal on
scandal, disgrace on disgrace—but—"to straighten things out."  She
pressed both hands to her face, flung herself upon the pillow and sobbed
into it—an outburst like a long-pent volcano relieving itself of the
fiery monsters that have been tormenting its vitals.

"We’ll not talk of it," he went on, as the storm was subsiding, "until
we’re both of us calmer."

A long pause, the silence broken by the sound of her sobs which she
strove in vain to suppress.  Then she heard his voice gently saying
"Good night."  And she was alone, dazed and shamed before this
incredible anticlimax to her forebodings.




                                 *XXV*


At nine the next morning she appeared at the laboratory as usual.  As
she was passing through Dick’s room, he glanced up.  Their eyes did not
meet.  "Good morning," she said without pausing.  She was in the rear
room and out of view when his cold answering "Good morning" came.  She
went about her work, and several times she carried in to him the things
she finished.  He was absorbed, seemed as unconscious of his
surroundings as had been his wont.  It was the rule there never to
interrupt; she did not break the rule.  Toward noon the quiet was
disturbed by the telephone buzzer.  She answered.  In Lizzie’s voice
came, "The grocery over to Wenona wants to speak to you."  She knew at
once that it was Basil.  "Ask them to call up again about four," replied
she and went back to her table.  At noon she stopped work and left for
the house.  At the usual time Richard appeared, had dinner with them
all, sat calm and silent and aloof, acting much as he always did.

In the warm part of the year, with the gardens to look after, it was her
habit to spend only the mornings at the laboratory.  She sent Helen to
the Donaldsons with Winchie about three.  When the telephone bell rang
she herself answered.  First came the voice of some clerk, then
Basil’s—"Is that you?"

"Yes," replied she.

"I’m at Fenton."

"Go to New York."

"Are you—well?"

"Never better.  Some one may be listening along the wire."

"I understand.  You are _sure_ all’s well?"

"Sure.  Wait in New York."

"I understand.  Good-by."

"Good-by."

As she hung up the receiver and turned round, she startled guiltily.
There was Richard, just stepping from lawn to veranda, his eyes upon
her.  She felt as if she had been caught violating in stealth an implied
compact not to communicate with Basil.  Dick’s expression told her that
he was reading in her eyes with whom she had been talking.  When they
were face to face, he on the veranda, she one step up in the doorway,
she said: "He wanted to reassure himself before starting East."

Dick’s lips curled slightly.

"It isn’t fair for me to let you think him a coward. I made him see so
clearly that——"

"You were right," he interrupted.  "I wish to hear no more about it."

Her eyes flashed at his peremptory tone, reminiscent of his habit of
brushing her aside as merely woman.  But the thought of Winchie was a
talisman against any attack of temper.

"You said last night," he went on, "that this is between you and me
only.  You were right.  So—I’ve wiped him off the slate."

As they crossed the lawn toward the water’s edge, she felt a fear of him
deeper than any that physical force could inspire.  If he had
threatened—had reviled—had done her physical violence, she would have
met him with contempt, with a sense of her own superiority.  But how
deal with this intelligence?  She had always known it was an
intelligence; she was realizing that it was an intelligence she did not
understand, was therefore superior to her own.  When they reached the
benches near the landing and sat, she was so weak that she could not
have walked many steps farther.

"I think," he began, a quiet sarcasm in his tone that did not lessen her
uneasiness, "you rather misunderstood me last night.  In such
circumstances, I believe, a man is expected to tear his hair and paw the
ground and do violent things.  I confess—"  He hesitated an instant
before going on—"I’ve had that inclination several times since I
recovered from my stupor.  Tradition and instinct and—vanity—are strong.
I’ll have to ask you to be a little careful what you say to me—not for
your own sake but for mine.  I have some emotional dynamite in my
nature.  I don’t wish it to be set off.  To mention only one thing,
there’s Winchie to be thought of.  I have no desire to punish you.  I
feel too human myself, to play the part of judge or executioner.  But,
most of all, I’m determined that Winchie shall never know—which means
that the world must never know."

Her clenched hands relaxed as she drew the first free breath since
Lizzie told her where he had gone.  Now, she felt she could face him for
the struggle for Winchie on less unequal terms—not on equal terms, for
he had the power to take Winchie away from her—had the power and—  _How_
could she prevent his using it?

"But when you came into the laboratory this morning as if nothing had
happened," he proceeded, "you showed that you misunderstood me."  He
looked away reflectively. "I don’t know just how I restrained myself."

"You were mistaken," said she.  "I went because it’s been my habit to
go.  I went just as you did."

He fixed his gaze upon her, danger in it.  "You count too much on your
success in deceiving me thus far," he said.  "I must ask you not to do
so—not to try to deceive me.  Do you suppose I don’t know now why you’ve
been coming to the laboratory?"

His menacing gaze did not daunt her.  She met it fearlessly.  "That was
the reason for a while—at first. But for a long time I’ve been going
because I liked the work."

He studied her with those eyes that saw into everything, once they were
focused properly.  "I beg your pardon," he said with formal courtesy.
"It’s true you couldn’t have worked so well if you hadn’t liked the
work."

"I’ve loved it."  And her tone put her sincerity beyond question.

He glanced away.  After a pause he said, "To go to the point—the future.
I thought at first that I’d decide alone what should be done.  Then it
seemed to me I hadn’t the right to act—about Winchie—without at least
finding out what your ideas were."

He waited long; she did not speak.

"You feel, I suppose," he said gently, "that you’ve forfeited the right
to speak."

She did not venture to contradict him.  Anything she would say, however
guarded, might anger him—and Winchie was at stake.

"As I told you last night, I know you are somehow not a bad woman.
Until yesterday, I’d have said there were just two classes of women—the
good and the bad. But I’d also have said that I’d have killed both you
and him.  I find I’ve got to revise many ideas I had.  Just how, I don’t
know.  I’m realizing in regard to my grandfather what I’ve long realized
about everything else—that nothing from the past is trustworthy.  The
wisdom of yesterday is the folly of to-day."  He roused himself from his
half abstraction, said, "So—you need not be afraid to speak out whatever
is in your mind."

On impulse of response to this breadth—an impulse that was yet, perhaps,
not without quick feminine wit to see and seize advantage—she said, "You
make me feel that I can trust to your sense of justice."

He smiled satirically.  "I see you still don’t understand.  You fancy
I’m more than human because I don’t act as if I were less than human.  I
know you are a woman, but women have been given mind enough to
distinguish between right and wrong, between honor and dishonor. And—
Is it necessary that I give its plain name to what you’ve done—to what
you are?"

"No," she said in a suffocating voice.  Only her boy was saving her from
bursting out.

"Then—don’t try to cajole me with talk about my sense of justice.  What
do you ask?"

All in an instant—whether because her natural bent was for the frank and
courageous or because instinct told her it was the only hopeful course
with him—she resolved to act as she felt, to speak her thoughts.  "What
do I ask?" she repeated.  "First, that you stop posing."

He flushed.

"If you really mean," she hastened on, "that you’re acting as you have
thus far because it’s the right way to act, because the way men usually
act is wrong and degrades them, why, you’ll stop trying to convince me
that you’re giving a wonderful exhibition of gracious generosity."

"I had no such intention."

"Then why do you treat me as if I were an object of charity?"

"You can hardly expect me to treat you as if you had done something
noble."

"You say I’m not a bad woman."

They looked at each other in silence.  "No, you are not," he said.  "You
have acted like a bad woman, but you are not a bad woman."

"Then," she went on slowly, never taking her grave, earnest eyes from
his, "I want you to ask yourself how it happens that the girl who, you
said last night, was good, the girl who loved you when she married you,
has become the woman you are condemning?"

A long silence.  He looked away, looked again—and his gaze remained
fixed upon her face.  Then, in a low, hesitating voice: "Well—how did it
happen?"

"Because you did not love me."

"You know better than that," he cried.  "I’ve never given any woman but
you a thought.  I’ve never—"  He broke off abruptly, grew angry.  "But
you’re simply trying to improve your position by putting me on the
defensive.  And I ask you again not to goad me——"

"Because you did not love me," she repeated.  "Your anger shows that you
are trying to deny the truth to yourself.  You married me on an impulse
of passion.  Oh, you had the usual romantic deceptive names for it—the
words that make the man feel spiritual and tickle the girl’s vanity.
But you’ve shown what it really was by giving me only an
incidental—carnal thought now and then. That’s been our married life."

"Why did you not tell me you had these false, unjust ideas?"

"But they’re not false, not unjust," she rejoined. "What do you know of
me except my outside?  What’s my mind like?  What’s my heart like?  What
do I, a human being like yourself, think and feel?  You don’t know.
You’ve lived on your grandfather’s pompous old-fashioned ideal—that lust
is love, if the preacher has christened it—that a woman’s whole life is
the good pleasure of her husband’s various appetites."

She paused for breath.  She was not so carried away by the tempest of
her emotions that she did not note that he was listening and thinking.
He presently said: "Even so, how does that excuse _you_?—you, the mother
of Winchie."

She paled, and her hands clasped convulsively in her lap.  But she went
boldly on.  "I had a heart and a mind, like you.  How could a human
being live the life you assigned me?  When I pleaded for a share in your
life you refused.  When I begged for freedom you refused. What I did was
my compromise between the woman and the mother.  A mother isn’t less a
woman, Richard, but more."

He rose in his excitement; for, his keen mind penetrated to her purpose.
"You want your freedom and you want my son!" he cried.

Her gaze was steady but her deep voice trembled as she answered, "I want
my freedom and I want my child—the child I brought into the world—the
child I’ve watched over from birth.  Be fair—be just, Richard.  What
have you done for him except provide the home the law would have
compelled?  You’ve amused yourself playing with him a few minutes now
and then.  You’ve asked me to buy him a present now and then.  And never
even inquired whether I’d done it.  Do you know his birthday?  Do you
know how old he is?  Do you know anything about him?  Why then do you
call him your son?"

He had been in such struggle with his fury that he was unable to check
her torrent of half-defiant half-piteous appeal.  He now mastered
himself sufficiently to say, "How dare you talk to me like this?"

"Because," replied she, quick as a flash, "I respect your intelligence,
even if you don’t respect mine.  You asked me to speak freely.  I’ve
done it.  Would you have preferred me to lie to you?"

He walked away from her to the edge of the lake, immediately returned
and sat again at the other end of the bench.  He eyed her passive
figure—hands quiet in her lap, gaze upon the town across the lake.  Her
face was quiet, but all the intelligence and character which her gayety
and small stature and young loveliness veiled from unobservant eyes were
clearly revealed now.  "It’s a succession of blows, these discoveries
that you are so different from what I imagined," said he.  With bitter
reproach, "When I think how I exalted, how I idealized you!"

"Did I ask you to do it?  Did I tempt you by hypocrisy? ... Whenever I’d
try to show you what I was, didn’t you stop me or refuse to listen?
And—is it true that you idealized me?  Is woman as mere female—mere
flesh an ideal?"

"I have told you——"

"But," she interrupted appealingly, suddenly all animation, "you spoke
without thinking.  Think of me as you’d think of one of your problems of
chemistry.  Don’t let your grandfather do your thinking—or the
hypocritical world—or the shallow people round us."

He was silent.  Presently he rose to pace the retaining wall.  As she
watched him there was no outward sign of the dread that was licking at
her heart like a flame at living flesh.  "And what of me?" he said,
wheeling abruptly upon her.  "You say it was my fault that you did what
you’ve done.  Do you mean to tell me you think you’re not to blame at
all?"

"No, I don’t think that," she answered.  "If I’d been brought up brave
and independent, instead of to be a cowardly dependent—  Oh, the crime
of it!  To take a being with a mind and a heart and, simply because it’s
female instead of male, to bring it up so that it’s unfit really to
live—to forbid it to live—to make it afraid to live!  If I’d been brave
I’d have spoken out frankly.  I’d have demanded my freedom—I’d have
taken it.  As it was—I broke my marriage promises—as you broke yours.
It was chiefly your fault."  And she went on, with flushed cheeks and
accusing eyes: "I don’t say it because I wish to shirk, but because I
must tell the whole truth so that you won’t do a cruel injustice.  You
promised me love and care and you gave me lust and neglect.  We were
joined in equal marriage.  You treated me much as if I were a slave
you’d bought.  And I had to submit.  For, I really was a kind of slave,
and I hadn’t the courage and the skill to go out and make my own
living—and anyhow, you could and would have taken Winchie away from me,
if I’d tried to do it. Isn’t that so?"

She saw that he was impressed.  Again he reflected a long time pacing up
and down the wall.  When he turned toward her once more he said: "But
listen while I state plainly what you ask.  You ask me to reward your
treachery by letting you marry the man who betrayed me—and you cap it by
asking me to let you make my son his!"

"No, Richard," she protested.  "I simply ask you to let me keep my child
on any condition you make.  I’ll promise not to see—him.  I’ll take
Winchie and live on the farm with my people until he’s old enough to go
away to school.  I know the law puts me at your mercy.  But I don’t
believe you’ll use your power to crush me."  She was choking, was
fighting back the tears.

He turned to the retaining wall, gazed into the water until she should
fight down the evidences of weakness which he could not but see she was
ashamed of.  When he joined her again, it was to say in a voice that
reassured her: "I want to do what’s best for us all—especially for
Winchie. It’s very difficult....  When I think of the misery I might
have caused, if I had believed Nanny and hadn’t had time to reflect—I
must not act until I’ve seen every side—Winchie’s—yours—mine——"

The sound of the supper gong came floating across the lawn.  Courtney
rose mechanically and in silence they returned to the house.  Helen and
Winchie had enjoyed themselves at the Donaldsons, and told all about it.
The strain between Dick and Courtney passed unnoticed.  When Winchie
went up, Courtney accompanied him.  Toward ten she left the book she had
been pretending to read and sat in the hammock on the balcony.  The
moon, huge and ruddy through an opening among the boughs, poured its
flood of elfin light over lake and lawns and gardens.  The soft shadows,
the vague vistas, the overpowering perfume of honeysuckle and jasmine
and rose combined to beguile her out of all sense of reality.  "I’ve
been dreaming—dreaming," she murmured.  And what an incredible dream!
No man—least of all Richard, the prejudiced, the domineering—would have
acted so in real life.  "A dream—a dream."  It was impossible, this
experience of hers that belied all she had read, all she had been
taught, about the relations of men and women.  She, a married woman, had
taken a lover—and, instead of its degrading her, it had made her better
than she had been when she thrust love out of her life and tried to live
by rule of duty to husband.  And now—instead of her husband’s killing
her or of her killing herself or of any of the various kinds of violence
prescribed for such situations, her husband had acted like a civilized
human being, gently, considerately, at the dictates of humanity and not
at the dictates of vanity.  And instead of abysm below abysm of disaster
and death in punishment for religion’s scarlet sin of sins for woman,
there was prospect of a life in which she could profit by the experience
she had gained.  "A dream—a dream."  Or, was a new world dawning?—a new
way of living that made the old way seem a grotesque carnival of the
beast in man?


As she was dressing next morning, in came Winchie. "Has papa gone away?"
he asked at the threshold.

She paused with the eye of her belt at the prong of its buckle.  "Why?"
said she.

"I don’t know whether I dreamed it.  I thought it was so.  I thought I
waked up and there was papa kissing me. And I thought it made me sad.
And he said, ’Good-by, Winchie.  Take care of your mother and do what
she says, and don’t forget me.’  And I kissed him and said, ’Can’t Mamma
Courtney and I go too?’  And he said, ’No, dear.’  And I said, ’All
right.  Bring me a gun, like Charlie Donaldson’s.’  And then I fell
asleep again."

In the mirror she saw him run to the door into the hall, pick up a
letter which had evidently been thrust through the crack.  She turned
and held out her hand.  He brought it to her, spelling out the
"Courtney" written on it as he came.  "Go take Aunt Helen down to
breakfast," she said. When he was gone, she opened the envelope and
read:


"The important point is Winchie.  I am going away to try to think it
out.  However, one thing is certain.  There must be a divorce.  In a few
days I shall send you a formal notice of abandonment, and you will begin
an action at once.  Until we are free—perhaps so long as you are
alone—it is best that Winchie stay with you.  I leave him on one
condition—that you keep him here, carrying on everything exactly as
usual. He must see no sign of change.

"Please let me know whether you accept.  A line, in care of my lawyers,
James & Vandegrift, will reach me.

"R.V."


"So long as you are alone."  Courtney felt as if the air had suddenly
changed from the leaden oppressiveness of before the storm to the
buoyant freshness afterwards. With the paralyzing dread about Winchie
removed, she could think of the rest of the situation.  She read the
letter again and again.  The regularity of line and word, the precision
of phrasing indicated a carefully copied final draft. There was not the
faintest clue to the feelings of the writer.  She recalled those last
two talks with him.  At both she was in no condition to observe him, so
absorbed was she in the things immediately at issue.  But now, as she
went over his words, looks, manner, she saw a personality wholly
different from the Richard Vaughan she had known—or had fancied she
knew.  That Richard Vaughan really had no personality beyond a chemical
intelligence, was an abstraction like an algebraic formula.  This
Richard Vaughan was a flesh-and-blood man; but—what sort of a man?  And
his conduct toward her, did it not mean that he had eliminated her as
one empties out a test tube when the experiment ends—in failure?  Did it
not mean supreme indifference?  Yes—it must be so.  Still, no ordinary
man, however indifferent to wife and child, could act in such
circumstances so absolutely without personal vanity, with such obvious
determination to do nothing small or revengeful. On any theory, there
must be behind those curiously unemotional lines a character big,
generous, incapable of meanness.

She looked at this newly revealed large personality, with a depressing
sense of her own contrasting smallness.  In the last few years of
widening intelligence her sex vanity, so diligently fostered throughout
her childhood and girlhood, had received many a rude shock from within
as well as from without.  But none so rude, so demolishing as this.
"He’s a man really worth while," thought she.  "And women are too
insignificant either to be loved by such a man or to love him."

She had been bred in and to the American feminine ideal—the woman
graciously deigning to permit some man to support her in idleness; the
man more than repaid by the honor of being allowed to support her;
whatever further he might get, a voluntary largess from his royal guest,
to be given or withdrawn at her good pleasure.  This delusion was a
distorted tradition from a bygone era—an era of conditions around the
relations of the sexes that are forever past.  In that "woman’s
paradise" women were scarce and men plenty; and there was the constancy
that is natural in a narrow life of severe toil, with the intelligence
too little developed to be restless or critical, with the passions
undisputedly in the ascendant.  This feminine tradition had been dying
hard, as delusions flattering to vanity, encouraging to laziness, ever
do.  She had tried to keep on believing the lies she heard and read
everywhere—especially novelists and preachers dependent on unthinking
women for a living—the romantic exaltation of woman’s love as of value
star spaces beyond the value of man’s love.  She had tried to suppress
her sense of humor and to be impressed when she heard women speak of
kissing a man in reward for some service as if one of their kisses made
an archangel’s diadem, in comparison, a cheap bauble.  She had tried not
to see how intelligent men scarcely restrained the grin of insincerity
as they poured out extravagances to some woman whom their whimsical
passions chanced to covet. She had struggled against the
disillusionizing thoughts about her own sex’s private opinion of itself
that would arise as she noted how often women treated lightly the man
who took them seriously and all but offered themselves to him who winked
as he bought or passed on untempted or cynically inquired for the inside
price.

Step by step she had been thrust out into the truth that the whole
feminist cult was a colossal fiction, that in the actualities of the
life of this new era woman’s value was precisely like man’s—the
usefulness of the particular combination of mind and heart, intellect
and character, that made up the personality.  She began to suspect that
woman’s ability to sway man through his passion was more often a
handicap to her, and to him, than a help to either.  She began to
realize that learning how to use that ability wisely was the supreme
hard problem the life of to-day set for woman to solve or perish.  While
passion sometimes had made one man for a moment slave to some one woman,
or a few men slaves to any woman, it had through all time made womankind
slave to mankind.  And in the new era, while the slave was still
willing, the master was becoming weary, was demanding something less
burdensome, more companionable.

As she stood at the bureau, buckle still unfastened, eyes and mind upon
those few calm, precisely pruned lines of Dick’s, there came a thought
that dealt a deathblow to her long dying feminine _folie de grandeur_.
While it was true she had not sought nor wished Dick’s interest of any
kind, the fact remained that he, after living in daily contact with her
for six years, had been so little affected by her personality that he
was letting her go without any sign of emotion.  "But I am as
indifferent to him as he to me."  she urged upon herself in hope of some
slight consolation.  She instantly remembered that it was he, not she,
who had begun the indifference.  And then came the stinging,
blood-heating recollection that he had used at his pleasure the only
part of her that had been able to impress him as valuable to a man of
purpose and achievement.  Nor could she dismiss him with a contemptuous
"low minded and unworthy," for she knew he was neither.  Squirm how she
would, she could not get away from the humiliating fact—"six years of
me, and not even enough physical value to make his jealousy for a single
moment triumph over his sense of self-respect!"

Winchie had finished breakfast and was playing with his wagon on the
veranda.  Helen was still at table.  "Has Mr. Gallatin gone East with
Dick?" she inquired, turning rosy red.

"No," replied Courtney, not noting Helen’s color.  If she had, she would
have suspected nothing.  When Helen came home in good spirits from that
visit to Saint X, after the Chicago shopping trip, and was no longer ill
at ease with Basil, Courtney—eager, as we all are, to seize the first
pretext to be relieved of a weight upon conscience—assumed that she had
got completely over her fancy.  As for Basil, Courtney trusted him
absolutely.

"But he’s away, isn’t he?" persisted Helen, after a pause.  "Lizzie
tells me his rooms haven’t been disturbed for two nights."

"He went day before yesterday, I believe," said Courtney.  "Did you see
Richard this morning?"

"Just a minute.  He was hurrying for the train when I came down."

"I thought he didn’t look very well, last night," pursued Courtney.

Helen, absorbed in her own agitating thoughts, failed to respond to this
lead; so she put the question direct. "How did he look this morning?"

"About as usual," replied Helen.  "I didn’t notice any change.  He had
on that new gray suit.  It’s very becoming.  When’s he coming back?"

Courtney seemed not to have heard.  "He forgot to give me his address.
Did he leave it with you?"

"The Willard in Washington, then the Astor in New York."

"It may be I’ll want to write him or something."

"I should think so!" cried Helen.  "You and he write every day, don’t
you?"

"Not to each other," said Courtney dryly.  "We never did establish the
daily letter.  That’s one of the dreariest farces in married life.  It
belongs to the kind of people who think they’re happy because they’re
too stupid or too bored to quarrel."

When she had eaten the tip end of a roll and drunk a little coffee, she
went out on the veranda, sent Winchie to the lawn and asked Helen to sit
with her at the western end where no one could hear or overhear.  "You
asked me when Richard was coming back," she began.

"It was simply a chance question," apologized Helen.

"He’s not coming back."

"Not coming back!" echoed Helen.  "You’re going to move East?"

The emerald eyes met Helen’s excited glance placidly. "We are going to
get a divorce," she said.

Helen’s big brown eyes opened wide.  With lips ajar she stared at
Courtney.  Then she gave a little laugh that sounded as if the shock had
unbalanced her mind and reduced her to imbecility.  "A divorce," she
murmured feebly.

"We both wish to be free," continued Courtney, talking in the
matter-of-fact way that was the surest preventive of hysteria in herself
or in Helen.  "So, he’s gone away.  I’ll stay here a while, then—  But I
haven’t made any plans.  There’s plenty of time."

A long silence, Helen gazing at Courtney, at Winchie racing along the
paths with his red-striped wagon, at Courtney again, at trees and lake,
as if she doubted the reality of all things.  "I don’t know what to
say!" she exclaimed at last.

"Naturally," replied Courtney, "since there’s nothing to say."

"I can’t believe it!"

"Why not?"

"There aren’t two people better suited to each other. Why, you never
quarreled."

"That’s it.  I love contention.  He wouldn’t give it to me.  So—pop goes
the weasel."

"How can you!  When your heart must be breaking."  Helen put aside her
stupefaction and brought the tears to her soft brown eyes in tardy
conformity to the etiquette for nearest female friend on such occasions.

"Now, dear, please don’t cry.  You know that I know how easy it is for
women to cry, and how little it means."

Helen hastily dried her eyes.  "Oh, dear!  It must be fixed up!" she
said in a more natural tone, genuinely sympathetic and friendly.  "He
doesn’t mean it.  I’m sure he doesn’t."

Courtney laughed—rather disagreeably.  Helen was confirming her own
newly formed, anything but exalted opinion of herself as a human value.
"I suppose it’ll never for an instant occur to anyone that I might be
the discontented one."

"Well, you know, yourself, Courtney," stammered Helen, "it doesn’t seem
likely a woman’d give up a good husband and a good home——"

Courtney’s arresting smile was bitterly ironic.  "Indeed it doesn’t,"
assented she.  "Give up what she married for? Not unless she was sure of
a better living.  Men think they marry for love—but it’s really to—I’m
not equal to saying why men marry.  You can find the reason in Ben
Franklin’s autobiography, if you care to look it up.  As for us
women—it’s the living."

"It’s not true of me!" cried Helen, who had in all its amusing, or
exasperating, efflorescence the universal feminine passion for drawing
everything down to the personal, for seeking a compliment to herself or
a reflection upon herself in any and every remark addressed to her by
man or woman.  "Poor as I am, I’m——"

"Never mind, dear," said Courtney with good-humored raillery.  "At your
age I was talking the same way. You’ll find out some day that the
hardest person in the world to get acquainted with is your real self.
Why, there isn’t one human being in ten million who’d know his real self
if they met in the street."  She rose to inspect the thick mat of
morning-glories trellised up the end of the veranda.  "And most of us,
if we were introduced to our real selves, would refuse to speak to such
low creatures—especially the romantic people."

"I _know_ I’d not marry for _anything_ but love!"

Courtney, her back to Helen, was busy with the morning-glories.  "Of
course," said she.  "One may eat because one is fond of the dinner—of
the dishes, of the way it’s served, of the company, and so on, and so
on.  But what’s the _real_ reason?"  She turned on Helen with a mocking
smile.  "Why, because to live one must eat.  That makes the rest
incidental.  A sensible person tries to take the most favorable view of
the food he has to eat or go without.  A sensible woman does her best to
love the man that asks her."

"I wish you wouldn’t say that sort of things, Courtney," Helen cried.
"I know illusions are illusions, but I want to keep them."

Courtney’s expression changed abruptly.  The deep-green eyes looked
dreamily away.  "If only one _could_ keep them!" she said.  "But one
can’t."  She shook her head sadly.  "One can’t."  Then her face
brightened.  "My dear, it’s better to throw them away oneself and
get—perhaps something better—certainly something truer—in place of them.
Sooner or later life will snatch them away, anyhow—and leave one quite
naked."  She turned sad, mysterious eyes on the girl.  "You don’t know,"
she went on, "what it has cost me, this being bred in illusions.
Illusions—everywhere!  Illusions for and about everything and everybody!
Oh, Helen—Helen—that’s what’s the matter with us women.  That’s why
we’re such poor creatures—why we make such bad marriages, why we’re such
imperfect wives and mothers.  We don’t think.  We purr or scratch."

A long pause, then Helen sighed.  "And I believed you and Richard were
happy!"

"No," replied Courtney, her smile mocking, but pain in her eyes.  "But
we’re going to be—if we can get over what our illusions have cost us and
can set our feet on the solid earth.  No more lies!  And the biggest lie
of all is that lying can ever bring real happiness."  She was standing
in the long, open window.  She thought a moment, then said with an
energy that frightened the girl: "And I’m sick—sick—sick of perfumes
that end in a stench!"


That afternoon she sent an acceptance of Richard’s proposition—a "line"
as he had suggested: "Winchie and I will stay on here until the
divorce—and, if you so wish, so long as I am alone.  I will keep Helen
here, too."  On the fourth morning after the dispatch of this, there
came a letter from James & Vandegrift, inclosing one, unsealed, from
Richard.  She read the inclosure first:


"MADAM: From this date I cease to be your husband. You may take such
legal action as this may suggest.

"RICHARD VAUGHAN."


She understood that Dick was simply meeting the legal requirements.
But, these curt words made her tremble, made her skin burn, made her
eyes sink with shame, though she was alone.  A few moments and she
glanced at the accompanying note from the lawyers.  This sentence in it
caught her eye: "As two years is the legal period in this State in
actions on the ground of abandonment, you will observe that the date of
Mr. Vaughan’s letter enables you shortly to begin suit."  She took up
Dick’s letter, looked at the date—August 17th, two years before.  Then
in a few weeks she could sue; in a few weeks more, she would be free.
Free!  That charmed word had no spell of exultation for her.  She sank
down by the window with heart suddenly faint and terror-stricken.  She
had been looking forward to a long time in which to plan—about Winchie,
about her future, about Basil.  And she would have only a few weeks.  A
few weeks—and her whole future to be decided—and she without experience,
without anyone she could rely upon or even consult, without resources.

August 17th—why had he chosen that date?  With so many serious things to
think of, her mind kept swinging back to that triviality—why August
17th?  All at once it flashed upon her.  August 17th—that was the date
when Nanny had spied on her and Basil at the summerhouse. She covered
her face, and the blood surged in hot billows against her scorching
skin.

Helen came, crying: "Oh, there you are.  Winchie wants ice cream for
supper.  Don’t you think—  Why, Courtney, how solemn you look!"

"And you would, too," said Courtney, "if your hair had been falling out
the way mine has lately."

"Don’t be so foolish," reassured Helen.  "You could lose half of what
you’ve got, and still have more than most women....  Perhaps it’s worry
that’s making it fall?"

"I—worry?  How absurd."

"No, I don’t believe you ever do."

"Let’s have the ice cream.  Chocolate.  And I feel just like jelly
roll."




                                 *XXVI*


The pause before the first decisive step toward freedom—and perhaps away
from Winchie—had shrunk to a day less than two weeks.

It is mercifully not in human nature vividly to anticipate catastrophe.
Death is the absolute certainty; yet no living being can imagine himself
dead.  And it was anything but certain that Dick would ever assert his
legal right and take away her child.  In her anxiety about Winchie, she
had been giving much thought to Dick’s character, which would be the
deciding factor.  And she was surprised at the knowledge of it she had
unconsciously absorbed. Except among fools—who, whether they look within
or without, see nothing—it is a commonplace of experience to discover
that what we fancied we thought about a certain person or thing is
precisely the opposite of what we really think when compelled to
interrogate ourselves honestly. That is why the whole world can live and
die by formulas in which it has not the least actual belief.  These
discoveries of our self-ignorance always astonish us, no matter how
often they occur.  Courtney had got many surprises of this kind in the
past two years; yet this find—her intimate knowledge of her "abstract"
husband’s character—seemed incredible.

It wasn’t strange that she should know how he took his coffee, his
favorite brand of cigarettes and of whisky, that he detested cold baths
and would not wear underclothes with silk in them, or, if it could
possibly be avoided, starched shirts—that he hated low shoes and high
collars.  As a "dutiful wife" she had made it her chief business, after
Winchie, to see to her legal husband’s material comfort, so far as he
would permit it.  But how had she come by a deep conviction of his
honesty, of his truthfulness, of his incapacity for meanness of any
kind?  Where had she got her confidence in his sense of justice—he who
had alienated her by his stubborn and tyrannical injustices to her?  Why
did she summarily dismiss as absurd the suggestion that his recent
conduct was dictated merely by indifference to her or selfish
consideration for his own comfort?  These high ideas of him certainly
did not date from their courtship and honeymoon; for, then she had no
more interest or discrimination as to character than the next young
person.  There was no accounting for it.  She simply found that these
beliefs were immovably lodged under the opinion of him she had supposed
was hers—the opinion that had made her love for Basil seem as right as
if she had been a girl.  So, while she feared he would take Winchie away
from her, with a fear dark enough to shadow her days and make many a
night uneasy, she was always saying to herself believingly, "He could
not do anything unjust."

One evening she fell into a somber mood.  It wasn’t so clear as usual
that Dick would see the to her obvious injustice of separating mother
and child.  She left Helen, went up and stole in to sit by Winchie’s
bed—a habit she had formed lately.  She got so low spirited that, when
she heard Helen go along the hall toward the upstairs sitting room, she
slipped downstairs and out into the air to wander among the flowers and
beneath the scented trees.  There was a thin moon and one of those
faint, soft, intermittent breezes that give the disquieting yet
fascinating sense of spirit companionship.  She strolled to the edge of
the lake; the fireflies seemed the eyes of the breeze spirits that were
whispering and friendlily touching her.  She saw a boat with a single
occupant a few yards down the lake, close in shore. Even as she glanced,
a low voice—Basil’s—came from the boat: "Courtney—may I come?"

She was not startled.  Before the voice she had thought, "Basil will
probably be trying to see me before long."  She answered in the same
undertone, "Helen may be looking this way."

"If you sit on the bench down here, I can come to you. The shadow’s deep
enough."

She hesitated, went to the bench he indicated.  The press of the
immediate had been all but keeping him out of her mind.  But whenever
she did think of him it was as her lover.  With a nature as tenacious as
hers habit is not dethroned in a day or demolished all at once by any
convulsion however violent.  Also, the more she suffered and the
lonelier she felt—not a soul about to whom she could speak or hint any
part of what was harassing her—the more tender grew her thoughts of the
man in whom she had invested so much.  Throwing good love after bad is
not a rare human weakness—and Courtney was by no means certain in those
depressed days that her investment had been bad, as such investments go
in a world of human beings.

He soon had his boat opposite the bench, made it fast. He sprang to her,
seized her hands and was kissing them. "No—no.  You mustn’t," she
protested, drawing away.

"Tell me all about it!" he cried.  "How I suffered till I heard your
voice on the telephone!  I was watching the house with a glass all
afternoon until dark.  I was in the boat, lying a few rods up there all
night.  And from dawn I was across the lake watching with the glass
again.  So, I knew everything was quiet.  But until your voice came, I
was mad with dread—though I had seen you, just like your usual self, in
the grounds and on the veranda hours before.  But—tell me all about it."

"There’s nothing to tell," said she.  His recital had seemed to her as
if it were of something in which she had neither part nor interest.

"He knows, doesn’t he?

"Yes—he knows."  And there she stopped because she never had discussed
and never would discuss with anyone what happened between her and her
husband.

"What is he going to do?"

"I don’t know."

"But—  Don’t keep me in suspense, dear.  Is he going to get a divorce?"

"No.  I’m to get it."

"Your voice is very queer.  Aren’t you—glad?"

"I’m afraid about Winchie."

"Oh—of course.  Does he threaten to—"  Basil halted.

"No.  But—  Basil, you must go."

"Go?  It’s perfectly safe here."

"Yes.  But I’ve no right to see you, after the way he has acted—until
I’m free."  All true enough; yet she could not make her voice sound
right to herself.  "It isn’t wise and it isn’t honorable," she ended
haltingly.

She saw, or rather felt, him eying her somberly.  "When will you be
free?" he asked in a constrained tone.

"In a few months—I think."

"And then we shall marry at once."  He said it in the tone a man uses
when he wishes to convince himself and another that what he is saying is
the matter of course.

She did not answer.

He laughed unpleasantly.  "You don’t seem overjoyed at the prospect."

"I’m thinking of Winchie."

"Oh!"  A pause; then he asked, "As soon as you’ve got Winchie safely,
we’ll marry?"

This was a question she had not faced alone, yet.  She was far from
ready to face it with him.  She found one of those phrases that come
easily and naturally to women, ever compelled to be diplomatic.  "If we
both wish it then."  Lightly, "You see, as I’m escaping with reputation
intact, you’re not bound to marry me."

"Bound?" he exclaimed.  "Courtney, please don’t joke about this."

"I’m quite serious—though I don’t act as funereally as you do when you
think you’re serious."

"We love each other, and——"

"Do we?"  An impulse of honesty, of impatience at her own yielding to
the temptation to temporize forced her to say it, "Do we, Basil?"

"Courtney, have you—changed?  Can’t you forgive me for——"

"It isn’t that," she interrupted, and she thought she was telling the
truth.  "Let’s never speak of that. No—it’s—  Could anyone go through
what we have without being—sobered?"

"That’s true.  It has made me love you more intensely, more earnestly
than ever.  What we’ve suffered has made us like—like the two pieces of
metal the fire fuses into one."

"That _sounds_ nice.  But—is it so?"

"You know it is!" he cried angrily.

"No, I don’t," she replied, as if she were weighing every word.  "I’ve
made up my mind not to tell any more lies, especially to myself.  I
don’t feel as I used to feel. There’s—some one between us."

"Vaughan?"

"Yes.  I’ve a sense of obligation to him.  If you had seen what I
saw—how far above the little men who go in for cheap theatricals or act
like mad dogs——"

To his sensitiveness it seemed for an instant that she was hitting at
him, was slyly reminding him of his own conduct.  But he soon felt that
he was mistaken—that there was another reason why her words stung him.
"It sounds as if you were falling in love with him," he said in a
grotesque attempt at a voice of raillery.

"No," replied she, and her voice satisfied him.  "That part of my life
is over.  It could no more be brought back than last year’s summer."

"Winter," he corrected.

"It wasn’t all winter, to be fair," said she, and changed the subject
with, "But—remember, you are free—free as I am.  We shan’t see each
other or hear from each other for a long time.  It may be that you’ll
fall in love with somebody else——"

"Courtney, do you love me? ... Look at me.  Answer."

She continued to gaze out over the lake.  "Honestly, I do not know.
Sometimes I think I do.  Again I wonder, did I love you or was I only in
love with love?  It’s so easy to fool oneself when one wants any thing
as much as I wanted love."

"If you knew how you were—hurting me you’d not say these things."

"Would you rather I lied to you?" she asked gently.

"Yes!  For, I love you and I can’t live without you. You’ve made
yourself necessary to me.  We must marry as soon as you are free and
have Winchie."

"Yes—we will marry, I suppose.  There isn’t anybody so near to me."

"Except Winchie."

"Winchie _is_ me."

"I understand," he said.  "It’s—beautiful.  Ah, Courtney, we must marry
as soon as we can."

"No.  I must—"  She paused.

"Go on, dear.  What is it that’s to keep us apart?"

"I must be independent as well as free."  The truth was out at last—the
truth her nature as a woman of sheltered breeding was always dodging,
but which her intelligence and pride were forcing her to face.  "I must
be independent."

"There couldn’t be any question of that kind between us."

"There shan’t be," replied she with energy that startled him.

"I’ll settle any amount you say on you.  I’ll make myself your dependent
if you wish."

She laughed in a sweet, tender way.  Whatever his faults and failings,
he certainly was generous.  "Basil!" she murmured.  Then: "As if that
would help matters. Why, anything I got from you would only increase my
dependence.  No, I must be really free—so neither of us could think for
an instant I was your wife because I had to be supported—or you were my
husband because you felt I was helpless.  We women have got to stop
being canary birds if we’re to get real self-respect—or real
consideration."

"What queer notions you do get," said he with man’s tolerant amusement
at the fantasies of the women and the children.  "Think of wasting such
a night—and our few minutes together—discussing theories—and sordid
ones!"

"Sordid!  Basil, we’re made out of earth and we’ve got to live on the
ground.  I’m done forever with the kind of romance and idealism we were
brought up on.  I’m going to build as high as I can, but I’m going to
build on the ground.  No more cloud castles that vanish when the wind
changes.  I’m going to use romance for decoration not for building
stone, and cakes for dessert, not in place of bread."

He laughed appreciatively.  "How clever you are! We’ll get on
beautifully," he said.  "You’re the sort of woman that never bores a man
or makes him feel like looking about."

"Are you the sort of man that never bores a woman or makes her feel like
looking about?"

"That’s not for me to say," answered he with a careless laugh.

"It doesn’t strike you as important—what a woman might think about such
matters, does it?" said she, good-humored in her mockery.

"Oh, yes—if the woman’s you.  But let’s not bother about such things.
It seems such a waste of time.  One kiss?"

She shook her head.  "Not with Richard looking on."

"Do you _want_ me to kiss you—dear?" he said passionately.

With a nervous glance toward the house she rose. "Please!" she said, in
vague entreaty.  "You must go."

"You haven’t told me—anything—yet."  He cast hurriedly about for some
way to detain her.  "There are your plans for being independent."

"I haven’t any."

"Do sit down.  I’ll not touch you again."

"It isn’t that, Basil.  It’s for the same reason that I didn’t write and
can’t.  Hasn’t what he’s done pledged us both to——"

"Don’t say any more, Courtney," he interrupted; for he saw how
profoundly in earnest she was, and respected her for it.  "You’re right.
I’m going."  He took her hand, pressed it.  "Dear," he said, "do you
know what it was that nearly drove me insane after you sent me away? As
soon as I thought about it, I knew no harm would come to you.  He’s
neither a coward nor a beast.  But I was afraid you’d—kill yourself."

"I never thought of it," laughed she.  "I’m too healthy. You ought to
build your romance round some lady with the morbid ideas that go with
addled insides—the kind they write novels about—only they call it soul."

He was amused in spite of himself.  "It’s lucky for you," said he, "that
you look like a romance.  If you didn’t, your way of talking would
discourage terribly."

"Is lying the only romance?" said she.  "Can’t you enjoy the perfume of
a flower unless you make a silly pretense that perfume and flower are a
fairy queen and her breath?"

She went with him to the retaining wall, gave him her hand, tried to
respond to his loving pressure.  He got into the boat.  His expression
in that odorous, enchantment-like dimness thrilled her.  The feeling
that he was going—leaving her to face the lowering future alone—saddened
her, moved her to an emotion very like the love that had so often
agitated her in these very shadows.  And when he murmured, "Soon—my
love!" she echoed "Soon!" in a voice melodious with the meaningless,
impulsive sentiment of the moment.  It sent him away believing.  He
pushed off.  She watched the boat glide deeper and deeper into the
shadow.  A few seconds and the darkness had effaced it.  She went slowly
up the lawn.  Before she reached the house, Winchie was again uppermost
in her thoughts; to think of Basil involved puzzling over too many
problems she was not yet ready to face.


That was one of the years when the warm weather stays on and on; goes
for a night, only to return with the morning sun and change the hoar
frost on the grass into dew; then in late October or later drifts
languorously southward through the dreamy haze of Indian summer.  On an
afternoon midway of this second and sweeter, if sadder, summer Courtney
came out of her sitting room to the balcony to rest a moment and to
watch the sun set—a dull red globe like a vast conflagration of which
the autumnal mists were the smoke and steam.  Winchie and Helen were
playing ball on the lawn, with Helen making great pretense of being
unable to catch or to hold Winchie’s curves and hard straights.
Winchie, about to throw, dropped the ball, jumped up and down clapping
his hands, made a dash for the veranda, crying "Papa!  Papa!"  Next she
saw Helen, in confusion, turn and go in the same direction, her delicate
skin paling and flushing by turns.

In the upstairs sitting room was the seamstress who made a local journal
of society gossip unnecessary; as the divorce suit had been begun and
was the chief local topic, the less she saw and heard, the more what
she’d circulate would sound like pure invention.  Courtney went along
the balcony to the hall window and entered there.  Winchie had just
reached the top of the stairs.  "Oh, mamma—" he began, all out of
breath.

"Yes, I know," said she, laying her finger on her lips. "Let’s go down."

And holding him by the hand she descended.  Richard and Helen were in
the lake-front doorway, Richard talking, Helen obviously nervous.
Courtney advanced, her hand extended.  "How do you do?" said she with
easy friendliness.

"No need to ask you that," replied Dick.  "Or the boy, either.  How he
has shot up!"

"We’ve had a great summer and fall for growing things," said Courtney.
Then to Helen: "Don’t let us interrupt your game."

"Yes—of course—  Come, Winchie," stammered Helen.

"Just watch me pitch, father," cried Winchie.  "Jimmie’s taught me to
curve."

"You don’t say!" exclaimed Dick with an interest whose exaggeration
roused no suspicion in the boy’s breast.

While Richard was watching the exhibition with such exclamations as
"fine"—"that’s a soaker"—"look out or you’ll do up your catcher,"
Courtney was watching him. She found no trace of the weary, tragedy-torn
misanthrope of song and story.  Evidently Dick had been too busy with
other things to bother about himself.  Instead of travel stains, there
was neatness and care and not a little fashion in his apparel.  Never
had she seen him so well dressed—-and in admirable taste from collar and
tie to well-cut tan boots.  His hair was short—the way it was becoming
to his long, strong face and finely shaped head.  The face was not so
gaunt as in those years of close application, especially the last two
years when indigestion was giving him its look of hunger and sallow ill
temper.  The cheeks had filled out, had bronzed, and the blood was
pouring healthily along underneath.  It was distinctly a happier face,
too.  The eyes following Winchie’s elaborate contortions in imitation of
the famous pitcher of the Wenona Grays had an expression of aliveness
and alertness that meant interest in the world about him.  He had been
one of those men of no age, like monks and convicts and professional
students.  He was now a young man—and a handsome young man.

When he turned away from the ball game, they went to the eastern end of
the veranda.  She sat in the hammock, he leaned on the broad arm of a
veranda chair. "Well," said he, by way of a beginning, "you see I’m
back."

"You’ve been abroad—haven’t you?"

"Paris and Switzerland.  I had a grand time.  Fell in with some English
people and we did three passes together, and then rested and amused
ourselves at St. Moritz. Then—to Paris.  I never thought I’d care about
eating, but the Ritz seduced me.  I think of nothing else. Then—London,
to get myself outfitted.  I needed it badly."

What he said sounded strange enough from him, from Richard the
abstraction, the embodied chemistry.  The way he said it was stupefying.
There was lightness; there was the sparkle that bubbles to the surface
of every look and phrase of a person with a keen sense of humor.
Richard had plainly come to life while he was away.  Said Courtney: "I
suspect you’ve not worked very hard this summer and fall."

"Work?" replied he, with a laugh.  "Not I!  It was a hard pull at first,
the habit had become so strong.  But I determined I’d freshen myself up.
Once I got away where I could take an impartial look at things, I saw I
was not only not getting the right results by such stolid, stupid
grinding but was actually destroying my mind—was getting old and stale.
So, I locked up the laboratory I carry round inside me, and set out to
learn to live—to learn to have a good time."

"And you did?"

"Once I found congenial people.  At first I was afraid I’d been stupid
so long that I’d lost the power to enjoy. But it came back."

As he talked Courtney’s spirits went down and down. Just why, she could
not have told.  She certainly wished Richard well, had no desire that he
should be miserable—at least, no active desire—though, of course, she
was human and would have found some satisfaction of vanity in a Richard
hard hit by the discovery that his domestic life was in ruins.  Still,
this vanity of desire to be taken tragically was not with her the
passion it is in most men and women.  She was far more puzzled than
piqued.  She could not understand how so serious, so proud a man as he
could dismiss a cataclysm thus lightly, no matter how little he cared
for her.  She had pictured him suffering, suffering intensely; these
pictures had given her many a self-reproachful pang, and of real pain
too.  Now—  Looking at this robust, handsome, cheerful person, well fed
and well dressed, she felt she had been making a fool of herself.

"Now that I come to examine you," he was saying, "you don’t look at all
well."

It was a truth of which she had been uncomfortably conscious from her
first glance at him.  "You ought to have gone away somewhere," he went
on.  "It’s a bad idea to stay in the same place, revolving the same set
of ideas too long.  Mrs. Leamington taught me that.  You’d like her.
Your height—much your figure—fairer skin, though—that clear healthy dead
white—a lot of really beautiful black hair—the kind with the gloss
that’s not greasy.  She certainly was interesting.  I didn’t even mind
her love of money.  She simply had to have it—needed it in her business
of being always wonderfully dressed and groomed to the last hair and the
last button."

Richard paused to enjoy contemplating the portrait he had painted.
Courtney wished to hear more.  "She was in your party?"

"She made most of the interest.  She cured me of my insanity for
work—gave me a wider view—made me stop being a vain ass, thinking always
about my own little ambitions and worries.  There’s a lot that doesn’t
attract me in women of the world.  They’re extremely petty at bottom, I
find.  But at least they do come nearer the truth with their cynicism
than we quiet people with our preposterous egotism of solemnity."

Once more her vanity winced—that he should fancy he had to go to Europe
and learn of a cynical mercenary of an English woman what she herself
had made the law and gospel of her life for years.  How feeble her
impression upon him had been!  True, the only chance one has to make an
impression is in the beginning of acquaintanceship; and in their
beginning she had been too inexperienced, too captivated with
romance—too youthful to have developed much personality.  Still, all
that did not change the central fact—she had been futile.

"How’s the divorce coming on?" he asked abruptly.

Courtney laughed—perhaps not so genuinely as it sounded, but still with
real humorous appreciation.  "The beautiful English woman—a long
silence—then the question about the divorce—that’s significant," she
explained.

"She’s not the marrying kind," replied he, easily enough.  "She’ll stay
free as long as her looks and her money hold out.  Then she’ll marry
some rich chap and go in for society....  She was an interesting woman—a
specimen, so to speak.  And I owe her a great deal.  She taught me a few
very important things—about myself—and about women....  What a fraud
this so-called education is.  One half of fitting a man for life is to
teach him to know men, the other half is to teach him to know women. And
we actually are taught only about things—and mostly trifles or
falsehoods as to them."

His manner demolished her suspicion.  There might have been some sort of
an affair between him and this English woman—perhaps had been.  If so,
it was a closed incident.  "You asked about the divorce," said she: "The
suit was begun, but it has gone over till the next term of court."

"Was it my fault?" he asked, apologetically.  "I’ve missed my mail for
nearly two months."

Her hands, clasped in her lap, were white at the knuckles.  Her eyes,
meeting his, had deep down an expression that also belied her calm
manner and even voice. "I didn’t want to take the last steps until we
had decided about Winchie."

"Winchie," he said thoughtfully, his glance wandering to the lawn.  The
boy and Helen were resting now, seated at the edge of the lake.
"There’s where marriage differs from other business.  When it goes
bankrupt, children are assets that can’t be liquidated....  What do you
think ought to be done?"

"I admit you’ve got a share in him," replied she.  "But you can’t help
seeing that he belongs with his mother."

"I do see it," he declared.  "If I took him, what could I do with him?
Helen’ll marry before long.  Then—  Could there be anything worse for
him than trusting him to the care of strangers? ... As for his traveling
back and forth between his mother’s house and his father’s—that’s a
farce that could only end in some sort of calamity to his character....
I don’t know what to say.  I know I could trust you absolutely to
protect him from any possible—unfortunate influences—but—"  And there he
halted.

She saw he was expecting her to realize that he meant the disadvantages
of Basil as a stepfather.  It was stupefying—simply stupefying—this calm
attitude of his toward such terrible things—at least, they were things
he had always regarded as terrible.

"Don’t be so gloomy about it," said he, as if reading her thoughts.  "I
find I can think a great deal more effectively when I’m not trying to
act like the best examples from fiction but am simply human and natural.
Courtney, the world—at least, the intelligent people in it—have outgrown
the old, ignorant, swashbuckling sort of thing. Of course, it still
survives, and ignorant people and vain people still try to act on the
prescriptions of yesterday—and all the literature still pretends that
they are valid. But the truth is, men and women are getting enlightened.
And we—you and I—are doing, not what looks best, but what is best.
Winchie isn’t a problem in a novel or a poem. He’s an actuality.  And I
see plainly his chances are better with you—in any circumstances—than
with me."  To make sure that she should understand, he repeated, "In any
circumstances."

Her eyes were full of tears.  "Thank you," she said humbly.  "Thank
you."

He shrugged his shoulders.  "For what?  For not being a fool?"  He swung
round into the chair and leaned toward her.  "There are some things
we’ve got to say to each other.  I went away to put off the saying until
I was sure just where I stood.  I am sure now.  Do you—  Shall
we—begin?"

"I wish to hear whatever you wish to say," replied she. "But—is it
necessary to say anything?"

He leaned back, lighted a cigarette, smoked in silence. She again
studied him.  That changed expression—the tense, concentrated strain
gone—a sense of life, of attractive possibilities in it other than
chemistry, gave him a humanness, a reality he had not had for her even
in their first months of married life.  "Perhaps you’re right," said he,
rousing himself.  "Why mull over the past?  And our futures lie in
different directions."  He noted the queer, intent look in her eyes.
"What’s the matter?  You seem puzzled."

"Nothing.  I—  Nothing."

"It’s the change in me—in my point of view—isn’t it?"

"Your—your mind certainly seems to have changed."

"Dropped its prejudices, rather," was his reply. "There’s a difference.
A man’s mind’s himself.  His prejudices are more or less external—can be
sloughed off, like clothes."

That was it, she now saw.  He had got rid of those prejudices.  The dead
hand of his grandfather was no longer heavy upon him.  This man, seated
there before her in the vividness of youth, was the real Richard
Vaughan.

"You used to tell me the truth about myself," he went on reflectively.
"I had never seriously thought about women—about the relations of men
and women. I simply accepted my grandfather as gospel on those subjects.
My crisis forced me to do some thinking—and I believe you’ll do me the
justice of admitting I never would be stupid enough to act in a crisis
without trying to use the best mind I had.  Well—when I got away—and
thought—I saw that the whole business was my fault."

"No," protested she.  "There was where I wronged you.  I blamed
you—myself a little—but you most.  That was unjust.  But let’s not talk
about it.  The past is—the past.  I wish to drop all of it except its
lessons.  They’ll be useful in the future."

"One thing more," he said.  "I want to say I’m glad of what has
happened."

She simply stared at him.

"That would sound strange, I suppose, to the mob in the treadmill of
conventionality," he went on, apparently not noting her expression.
"But I’m grateful to—to whatever it was—fate or chance or what you
please—for my awakening.  But for it, what’d have become of me? Like so
many men who try to be masters of their profession or business, I had
let it become master of me.  A little longer, and I’d have been a
dust-dry, routine plodder, getting more and more useless every day.  No
wonder the world advances so slowly.  Just look at the musty, narrow
rotters who do the work.  They specialize.  They soon lose touch with
the whole.  And their minds dwindle as their natures and interests
narrow."

"You’re not thinking of giving up your work!" she exclaimed in dismay.

"I’m here to begin again," replied he, with his fine look of energy and
persistence.  "But not in the old way. Not month in and month out, like
a hermit—but with some sanity—and, I’m sure, with better results.  That
brings me to my real reason for calling.  I wished to ask if you had any
objection to my living and working at the shop."  As the color flamed
into her face, he hurried on, "I’ll keep an independent establishment in
every way and bind myself not to disturb you.  If you like, Helen can
bring Winchie down to see me from time to time—but not unless you like."

"I’ll take Winchie and go to father’s," said she, painfully embarrassed.
"I’d not have stopped on here, but you’ll remember you made it a
condition——"

"If you leave, I leave also," he rejoined.  His manner was emphatic,
final.  "I’ve no intention of intruding. Please forget I said anything."
He rose to leave.  "I’m going to move my laboratory to Chicago or New
York. A few months sooner will make no difference."

She insisted that she would go—that she preferred to go—that going was
entirely agreeable to her.  But in the end he convinced her he really
wished her to keep on at the house, to make Winchie feel it was his
home—and would leave if she even talked of leaving.  "I’ll arrange with
Gerster’s wife over at the farm to feed me and keep the apartment in
order.  So, everything will go on just as if I were a thousand miles
away."

When he went—like a caller after a pleasant hour—she was glad because
she wished to be alone, free to shut herself in her room with the many
strange things he had given her to think about—the many startling
things.  But just as she got the seamstress off for home, in came Helen,
hoping that Courtney would talk of the amazing call, determined to talk
of it herself, anyhow.  "Forgive me for asking, Courtney," said she.
"But I simply must.  You’ve decided to give up the divorce, haven’t
you?"

The emerald eyes looked amused astonishment. "Why?" she asked.

"You and he are just—just as you always were."

"Indeed we’re not!" exclaimed she.  "Absolutely different."

"But I never saw two people friendlier——"

"That’s it.  That’s precisely it.  Now that we’ve freed each other, I
can like him and he can like me."

Helen was not hearing.  Suddenly she burst out: "Oh, Courtney!
Courtney!  What will become of you!  You’ll have no money—for you’re not
asking alimony.  You’ll only have to marry again."  Courtney frowned at
this frank statement of the problem she was putting off.  "You know
you’ll have to marry again," pursued Helen, "and it isn’t likely you’ll
do as well.  Men don’t care for widows of any kind—least of all, grass
widows.  They want a fresh, unspoiled woman."

Courtney’s eyes danced.  "The truth from Helen—at last!"

But Helen was unabashed.  Because she was taller and graver than
Courtney, she felt older and wiser.  And because she loved Courtney, she
felt she must do all in her power to avert the impending catastrophe
through this divorce madness.  "I do believe you’ve got no common sense
at all!" she cried.  "You talk wise enough—sometimes. But when it comes
to acting—  Courtney, women brought up as we’ve been simply have to be
supported. And it’s our right!"

"Is it?" said Courtney.

"Aren’t we ladies?  But you’ve never been poor.  You don’t realize what
you’ve got to face.  You don’t realize it’s your position as Richard’s
wife that makes everybody act so sweetly and respectfully toward you—and
that makes you feel secure."

"Oh, yes, I do," said Courtney gravely.  "I realize it so keenly that
I’m afraid of myself—afraid I’ll be tempted to do something
contemptible.  When I married, I had the excuse that I believed I loved
and was loved and it’s the custom for a man to throw in support with his
love.  But if I married again—feeling as I do—I’d—"  She flung out her
arms.  "I don’t want to think about it!" she cried.  "I’ll not do it!
I’ll not do it!"

Helen could not understand.  And she was glad she couldn’t, for she felt
that such ideas, whatever they were, did not make for feminine comfort.
She had listened impatiently to Courtney.  She now brought the
conversation back to the only point worth considering.  "But you’ve
_got_ to marry," said she.

"No!"  Courtney had the expression of fire and purpose that makes a
small person seem tall.  "There’s an alternative.  I can do for myself."

"Do what?" demanded Helen.  She waited for a reply—in vain—then went on:
"What could you do that anybody would pay for?  Besides—you, a lady,
couldn’t ask for work.  You don’t know how I suffered when I thought I
was going to have to do it.  And you’d suffer even more—having occupied
the position you have.  What a come down!"

"Don’t!" commanded Courtney.  "Helen, you are tempting me."

"I’m talking the sense to you that you’ve so often talked to me," Helen
insisted.  "Unless we women have got money of our own or a man with an
income back of us, we’re—  I’d hate to confess the truth even to another
woman."

Courtney nodded slowly several times, then asked, "Don’t you think it
ought to be changed?"

"No!" cried Helen vehemently.  "It’s what God intended. The penalty of
being a man is to have to work. The penalty of being a lady, and refined
and dainty and untouched by low, vulgar things, is to have to be a
dependent.  And it’s not such a heavy penalty, either.  Even if one
doesn’t care much about the man, one isn’t inflicted with him all the
time."

At these plain truths wrenched by loving anxiety from the deepest and
securest of hiding places, Courtney’s eyes danced.  She’d have laughed
outright, had not Helen been so terribly in earnest—Helen without a
sense of humor. However she did venture to say: "The chief equipments of
a lady are a stone instead of a heart and a hide instead of a skin—is
that it?"

But Helen did not see the ironic comment on her philosophy.  "Well," she
went on in her serious, stolid way, "I don’t want responsibility.  And I
like to take my ease—and to have to do only things it doesn’t much
matter if they go undone.  We women are different from men. Our
self-respect’s in a different direction....  Dear, can’t I do something
to help you?"

Courtney kissed her penitently.  She always felt ashamed after poking
fun at Helen whose heart was so genuinely good and kind.  "Nothing,
thanks.  The divorce must go on.  You don’t understand, Helen.  Believe
me, if I knew that sheer misery was waiting for me, as soon as I was
free, I’d still go on."

"Let me talk to Richard.  I can do it tactfully."

In her alarm at this Courtney caught hold of Helen. "If you did such a
thing, you’d be doing me the greatest possible injury."

"Don’t be afraid, dear.  I’d not meddle.  But—"  She looked appealingly
at Courtney—"please, dear—do let me!"

"Richard and I would both resent it equally."

"But what _will_ become of you!"

Her tone was so forlorn that Courtney had to laugh. "Why, I’m barely
twenty-five—and I know a lot about several things—and could learn more."

"Don’t talk that way!" cried Helen, tearful.  "It makes me shiver.  It
sounds so coarse and common."  She looked at Courtney as if doubtful of
her sanity.  "I can’t make you out.  It isn’t natural for a lady bred
and born, as you are, to say such things."

"You can’t believe a real lady could have ideas of self-respect?  Well,
I’ll admit they do seem out of place in my head—and give me awful
sinkings at the heart. And—"  There was a mocking smile round Courtney’s
lips, a far-away look in her eyes—"Sometimes I’m haunted by a horrible
dread that I’m merely—bluffing."

Helen saw only the smile.  "I’m sure you are, you dear, sweet,
fascinating child!" cried she, greatly consoled and cheered.

"Don’t be too sure!" warned Courtney, the smile fading.

But Helen was delighted to see that she said it half heartedly—that some
effect had been produced by the grewsome reminders of the difference
between independence as a dream or a vague longing and independence in
the grisly reality of the working out.




                                *XXVII*


After a few days Courtney asked Helen to take Winchie to the laboratory.
"You can arrange with Richard as to future visits," she said.  "And in
talking with him—and with me—please remember he and I don’t exist for
each other.  I can trust you?"

"Yes," presently came from Helen in so reluctant a tone that Courtney
congratulated herself on having thought to exact the promise.

Winchie said little about his father at the supper table, but a great
deal about a streak of light his father had made for him with an
electrical apparatus—"clear across the room, mamma—real lightning—only
there wasn’t any thunder—just noise—like when Jimmie snaps the whip
fast."  Several times in the next three or four weeks she discovered
evidence of visits to the laboratory in remarks Winchie let drop; for he
said nothing direct, having somehow divined that the visits were not to
be talked about.  But he had not the faintest suspicion there was
anything wrong between his father and his mother.  He had always been
used to their leading separate lives; the mere surface cleavage was too
unimportant to affect him, all-observant though he was, with his natural
mind which Courtney had not spoiled by false education.  And the parents
of the only children he played with—those along the shore—were exceeding
discreet in discussing the divorce in the family circle.

In the first winter storm one of the maples near the edge of the lake,
about the oldest and finest tree on the place, blew down and in its fall
destroyed the summer-house.  Courtney was awakened by the resounding
crash. Before breakfast she, in short skirt and close-fitting jacket,
went to see and to decide what should be done.  As she reached the scene
Dick in shaggy ulster and cap came from behind the towering mass of
wreckage.  She could not be certain whether his ease, so superior to
hers, was due to his having seen her coming and having got ready, or to
absolute indifference.  "Jimmie told me what happened," explained he.
"I came early, thinking I’d not be caught trespassing."  He looked sadly
at the great tree, with its enormous boughs sprawled upon the frozen
surface of the lake.  "Jimmie and I," said he, "used to have a swing in
it that went out over the water.  We used to dive from the seatboard."

Courtney could see the swing go up and up, high as the tree itself, then
a daring boy release his hold and shoot through the air, slim and
straight, to plunge into the lake. "You’d almost touch bottom away out
where it’s deepest—wouldn’t you?" she said, her eyes sparkling.

"I’ve brought up mud in my hands from where it’s twenty feet deep."

They stood in silence, in the presence of the fallen giant whose life
had begun when the Indians trapping and fishing there were getting from
the far coast beyond the mountains the first rumors of the great winged
boats and the white man.  "It was a grand tree," she sighed.  "I’ll miss
it as I’d not miss many people I’m more or less fond of.... I remember
that swing."

"You do?"

"One day my mother brought me along when she was calling here.  I must
have been about the age Winchie is now.  I had on red shoes—I remember
because they hurt terribly and I didn’t dare show a sign for fear they’d
be taken away.  You lured me out to play—and put me in the swing—and
made it go—the limit."

"I remember perfectly now.  That was _you_—was it?"

"It was.  It was," replied she.  "You despised little girls and thought
you’d scare me to death."

"But I remember you were game.  You didn’t scream."

"I guess I was too badly frightened.  Do you remember how mother
shrieked when she saw from the window what you were up to?"

"Do I?  The whipping father gave me bent the whole business into me
forever.  _I_ wasn’t game.  How I did howl!"

"I wish I’d heard!"  She shivered laughingly.  "I feel now how I was
suffering when the swing was out over the water and high up among the
boughs."

Richard was looking at her curiously.  "So, that was you?" he said in an
abstracted way.  "You certainly didn’t look scared....  Helen tells me
you’re planning to go East in the spring and study landscape
gardening.... I see you don’t like her having told me.  I assure you it
was my fault.  I asked her point blank.  She told me simply the one
fact."

"It’s not a secret," said Courtney, and she went on to explain, as to an
acquaintance who knew nothing of her life, "I used to go to college—up
at Battle Field—with a girl named Narcisse Siersdorf.  She’s made quite
a reputation as an architect.  We were good friends, and it occurred to
me I might get advice from her.  She’s been wonderfully kind—took an
interest right away. We’re negotiating.  I don’t know what’ll come of
it. I’ve sent her an account of things I’ve done, and some pictures."

He looked at the slight, strong figure, at the small and delicate face,
at the eyes so feminine yet for all that full of character.  "Are you in
earnest?" he asked.

"I’ve got to be," replied she.

His expression showed how he was touched by her air of sad
thoughtfulness as she gazed across the glistening level of ice.  "Not at
all," said he.  "While nothing’s been said about it, you must know that
as Winchie’s mother——"

She interrupted him with a laugh that made the color flare into his
face.  "So, you thought I was hinting, did you?  I don’t suppose you
ever will be able to understand a woman.  No—I don’t hint."

"I didn’t suspect——"

"Be honest!"

He hung his head like a foolish boy.

"As I was saying," she went on, "I’ve got to do something because, when
I’m free, I want to feel free.  Maybe I’m flying in the face of nature,
but I’ve a hankering for the same sort of independence a man has—not the
same, but the same sort....  It isn’t a bit nice, being a woman—if one
wakens to the fact that she’s in the same market—if in a higher grade
stall—with ’those others.’"

He looked up with a frown.  "That’s not the way to look at it," he
protested with more than a touch of his old-time dictatorial manner.

"It’s the way _I_ look at it," replied she, quietly.  That reminder of
his tyranny, added to his unconsciously contemptuous suspicion that she
was hinting for alimony, had stirred all her latterly latent antagonism
to him—made her doubt the sincerity—or, rather, the thoroughness of the
change in him.  She began to move away.  "I must go tell Jimmie what to
do about this tree."

"Please—not just yet," he said, red and embarrassed. "I beg your pardon
for taking that tone.  And I’ll admit you’re right, though I’d like to
be able to deny it.  Still, it’s not your fault that you were brought up
in the customary way——"

"I don’t want to be reminded of that," she interrupted, rather bitterly.
"In spite of all I’ve been through—and of the certainty that unless I
free myself, I’ll have to go through it again—I’m having a constant
fight against my cowardice."  Her face changed in an instant from grave
to gay.  "I’m saying and doing all sorts of things to make it impossible
for me to back down.  I guess telling you was one of them."

"You’re not going to make any move until spring—toward this architect
friend, I mean?"

"I’ve no reason to think—at least not much reason—that she’ll take me."

"Meanwhile—why not perfect yourself in the trade you already almost
know?"

"What’s that?"

"I’m going to pay a man a hundred and fifty dollars a month to help me
at the laboratory—exactly the work you did—and he’ll do it no better, if
as well."

Courtney flushed with pleasure at this praise.  "Really?" she said.
"You mean that?"

His expression forewarned her he was about to touch on the impossible
subject.  "I can’t comprehend, now that it’s over," said he, "how I was
such an ass as to stick to the notion that women haven’t brains when I
had, right before me, proof to the contrary."

"Meaning me?" said she with amused eyes.

"Meaning you," replied he with a laugh.  Then seriously, "And if you’ll
let me say so, the reason I blame myself for everything is, I’ve seen
that my stupid ignorance of you was at the bottom of it all."

She shrugged her shoulders indifferently.  "We were both brought up very
stupidly for marriage.  But then—who isn’t?  No wonder marriage is
successful only by accident."

"What a confession the proverb is," said he, "—that people have to be
married once, before they’re fit to be married."

"Well," said she, "at least we’ve had our experience, and can be glad we
got it young enough for it to be useful. But I must get to work."  And
she nodded and went briskly up the snow-drifted lawns.  Not until
afternoon, while she was overseeing the sawing up of the tree, did his
unfinished offer come back to her.  Had he left it unfinished because
she had not encouraged him to go on or because he had repented of the
impulse?  Probably the latter, she decided; at any rate, even if he had
urged, she could not have accepted.  "He’d be sure to misunderstand.
Men and women always do misunderstand each other—"  She smiled at
herself—"that is, they don’t.  They learn by experience that there’s
always the motive behind, in everything that crosses the sex line.  He’d
not realize this was an exception."  There she mocked herself again.
"At least, I think it’d be an exception.  I’m not quite sure I’d not be
doing it out of cowardice—to get him where I could recover him if I lost
my nerve and had to.  Our dependence makes us so poor spirited that,
though we know we don’t want a certain man, we like to have him where we
could use him, ’in case.’"


Several stormy days, with no communication between house and laboratory.
On the first bright afternoon, she and Winchie were entering the grounds
after a walk to Wenona and back, through the still, dry air, charged
with sunbeams, air like a still, dry champagne, strong and subtle. They
came upon Dick clearing the snow from the direct path between laboratory
and gates.  His trousers were tucked into high boots and he was in
flannel shirt sleeves. As they—or, rather, as Winchie—paused, he leaned
on his shovel and laughed—at the fun that is merrier than any joke—the
fun of being healthily alive from center to farthest tip.  The sunshine
was brilliant on the unsullied surface of the snow, on the ice-encased
branches, and on those three health-flushed faces.  "Just been to the
doctor’s, I suppose?" said he to the boy who was as ruddy as a rooster’s
comb, as smooth and hard as marble.

"No," declared Winchie, taking him seriously, "I never had a doctor in
my life."

This was a good enough excuse.  Dick and Courtney became hilarious over
Winchie’s earnestness.  As Winchie had begun to play with the snow his
father’s labor had piled high on either side of the reappearing path,
Courtney did not resist Dick’s overtures toward conversation—about the
skating, the air, the healthfulness of a hard winter, the ravages of the
storm throughout the neighborhood.  "I see," said he, "the old maple’s
gone.  You did clear it up in a hurry.  There’s not a sign of its ever
having been in existence—or the summerhouse either."

At that the color poured into her cheeks—the deeper, fierier red of
acute embarrassment.  When he realized what he had said—which he
instantly did—he did not color but became pale.  "I’m glad it was
destroyed," he said, "glad not a trace of it remains—_anywhere_.  If I
believed in omens I’d look on the whole incident as a good omen—the
landmark of the Vaughan home that seemed so strong and wasn’t—the
summerhouse that was a constant reminder—both gone—and the place where
they were is clear—is ready for the new and better things."

She was listening with her head low.  "Thank you," she said, in a choked
voice.  "Sometimes I think there isn’t another man in the world who’d
have helped me as you have."

"Don’t you believe it," cried he, cheerfully.  "Human nature’s a lot
better than it pretends.  Thank God, very few of us are despicable
enough to live up to our creeds and our conventions....  Winchie, you
didn’t know you came very near losing your father yesterday.  He almost
blew himself up."

Winchie’s eyes grew big.  "I’d like to have seen," said he, excitedly.
"Jimmie says, when you do go, it’ll be straight up through the roof and
high as the moon."

"It all came of my working without an assistant," Dick explained to
Courtney.  "I’ve got one coming from Baltimore, as I think I told you
the other day.  But he can’t get away just yet.  I wish you’d consider
my offer."

She felt no embarrassment.  His tone prevented; it was businesslike, and
polite rather than friendly.

"I need some one badly—some one I shan’t have to teach.  You like the
work.  You need the experience.  A few weeks of the sort of thing I’d
put you at now would fit you for a place in a first-class laboratory."
A little constrainedly—"I know why you hesitate.  But I assure you,
that’s foolish.  What I’m proposing will not interfere with—with our
plans for freeing each other.  It’s purely business—and good business
for you as well as for me."

She looked directly at him for the first time.  "You’re quite sure you’d
not misunderstand?"

"Quite," he assured her.

She still hesitated.  "I want to accept," she confessed, "for business
reasons.  But I’ve an instinct against it."

He smiled with good-humored mockery.  "A vanity, you mean."

She colored guiltily, though she also was smiling.  Her nervous fingers
were pulling the ice from a branch of a bush.

He noted that Winchie, rolling up a huge snowball, had got safely out of
hearing.  "Just a vanity," he went on. "Well—pitch it overboard.  I make
you a business proposition.  I need you.  You need the experience.  I
hope you’ll accept.  I can well afford to pay you what I’ll pay Carter.
He’s tied up until January—perhaps a little later. If you’ll accept, I
can accomplish a lot this winter.  If not, I’ll be nearly helpless."


Thus it naturally and easily and sensibly came about that, a few months
later, at the very moment when Judge Vanosdol was signing the decree of
divorce, Dick and Courtney were in the laboratory, their heads touching
as they bent over a big retort, heedless of the strong fumes rising from
its boiling and hissing contents.  The heat subsided. The compound
slowly cleared—a beautiful shade of green instead of the black they
hoped for—and confidently expected.  They looked dejectedly at each
other; she felt like weeping for his chagrin.

"What the devil is the matter?" demanded he, glowering at her.  "Sure
you didn’t make a mistake?"

Her nerves were on edge, as were his.  "That’s right!" she said, tears
in her eyes.  "Suspect me."

"I’m not suspecting you," he retorted angrily.  "Don’t drag your sex
into work.  You’re not a woman here.  We’ve no time for poodle-dog
politeness."

"I don’t want politeness," cried she.  "What did I say that could
possibly make you think I did?"

"It was what you didn’t say," replied he.  "Why didn’t you answer back?
Or throw the ladle at me?"

"I will next time."

And there they both laughed.


Now, she was free—absolutely free—and with money enough of her own
earning to get her and Winchie to New York and to keep them for quite a
while.  And Narcisse Siersdorf had written most encouraging comments on
the account of her efforts at landscape gardening and on the
accompanying photographs, and had offered her a clerkship at twenty-five
dollars a week "as a starter."  Also, Richard, as an earnest of his
belief and his interest, had got her an offer of a trial position at
twenty dollars a week in the laboratories of the American Coal Products
Company at Chicago.  She was not only free; she was independent.

The morning after Narcisse’s letter came she saw Richard eying her
curiously several times, as if he were puzzling over something but
hesitated to question her.  The fourth or fifth time she caught him at
it, she said: "What do you want to ask me?  Have I made a mistake?"

"No—no, indeed," protested he.  "You don’t make mistakes."

He had been extremely polite, no matter how severely his temper was
tried, ever since the day of the little flare-up over the failed
experiment.  And every day it pleased her through and through, pleased
and thrilled her, that his reason was fear lest she, perfectly free to
go, should resign and quit, if he did not behave.

"Then," she went on to him, "why do you look at me inquiringly?"

"It’s your manner," replied he.  "You’re acting very differently to-day
from what you ever did before."

While he was saying it she divined the reason—the letter from Narcisse.
The offer from the Coal Products Company had come several weeks before;
but that had been got for her.  This position in New York was of her own
getting. And for the first time in her life she felt like a full-grown
personality capable of taking care of herself.  Unconsciously her whole
outlook upon life changed; the change disclosed itself in her
expression, in her voice, in her manner.  She handed Richard her patent
of nobility, the letter from Narcisse; she watched his face as he read.
But she got no clue to his thoughts.  As he gave back the letter without
comment she said: "I’m in the way to get rid of the reason for a woman’s
so often wishing she’d been born a man."

"I understand," said he, and turned away to gaze reflectively out of the
window.

She went into the rear room to work there.  Half an hour later she
returned, to find him still staring out over the lake.  "I’ve given him
something more to think about," said she to herself, with a sly smile at
his back.  "And it’ll do him good, if ever he starts out to marry
again."  Yet somehow she was not fully satisfied that her guess covered
the whole of what he was thinking.  He was extremely puzzling, this
polite, appreciative, carefully businesslike Richard.

She was impatient to be gone.  She wished to try in longer flight the
new wings of freedom and independence she had grown.  She felt confident
they would sustain her; but she could not be sure until she tried.  She
had decided for the Siersdorf offer.  She liked the chemistry chiefly
because, working with Richard at the explorations of hydrogen and
nitrogen, she was moving toward a definite high accomplishment—the
discovery of a source of happiness to millions—a cheap substitute for
coal and wood that would banish that horror of horrors, cold, from the
lives of the poor.  But it would be quite another thing to work at
fabricating new shades of color in dyes, new commercial uses for the
by-products of coal; she would be descending from scientist’s helper to
plodder for a living, from lieutenant of a Columbus to mate on a tramp
steamer.  Not so, if she went into the Siersdorf office.

There she would remain artist, worker with the fine tools of the
imagination.  Also Basil’s tastes lay in that direction. Fancy is not
the air plant that idealists pretend.  Its flowers may be spiritual but
its roots strike deep into the physical.  It may need the sun and the
air of heaven, but it needs the soil even more.  In the soil it is born;
by the soil it chiefly lives.  Courtney’s fancy was the fancy of a
normal human being in whom all the emotions are healthy, ardent, fully
developed.  It had no long or difficult task in blurring into vagueness
whatever marred her memory of her and Basil’s romance—or at least in
making the blemishes for the time seem unimportant in presence of the
rosy, horizon-filling peak moments of their happiness.  Once more, from
the quiet of her long lonely evenings—hardly the less solitary for
Helen’s rather monotonous company—arose the longings, the visions, the
thrills.  She felt that, in her young inexperience, she had been too
arrogant in her demands upon life; she had asked more than she could
possibly expect from a human love, more than she had any right to
expect.  But now she was chastened; her point of view was less wildly
romantic.  What would they not be to each other!—once they were
together—and free from all constraint of moral doubts and conventional
dreads.  It was only natural that in their life of stress passion should
have been uppermost, should have become dominant.  It was human for
Basil to feel that he was contending for even physical possession of
her—and until there is physical possession, love has no substantial
ground to build upon.

She was eager to be off for New York, to establish her independence, and
then to begin her real life on the enduring foundation of equality and
comradeship brightened by passion as a tree is brightened by its
blossoms and their perfume.  But, eager though she was, she could not
deny her obligation to remain until Dick’s assistant came.  She knew now
that he had spoken the literal truth when he said he needed her badly.
It would be a return for his broad-minded humanity quite beneath her, to
leave him in the lurch—especially when carrying on his particular line
of experiments meant danger if he had to do all the work alone.  She
must stay until Carter came.  And she was glad of this opportunity to
show him that she did appreciate what he had done for her, even though
he had done it not for her sake but for his own—in obedience to his
sense of the decent and the self-respecting.

So, she worked steadily and interestedly on, just as if the divorce had
not yet been entered upon the records of the court as valid and final.
She found an unexpected additional source of interest in studying her
former husband as an individuality.  It is always a novel sensation for
a woman with any claim to physical charm to find herself regarded
impersonally—sexlessly.  That is usually anything but an agreeable
sensation; every woman feels the chagrin of failure when she sees that
her charms do not charm—this, though she might be disdainful of and
resentful of overt tribute to her physical self.  Courtney, however, did
not in those peculiar circumstances feel sufficiently piqued to try to
assert woman’s ancient right of dominion over the senses of man.  She
could enjoy the novelty of being treated like a man, and could study
calmly the man who was thus unmindful of what is habitually uppermost in
any strongly masculine nature.

At work with Richard alone, she was at last getting acquainted with him.
From the beginning of each day at the laboratory to the end, she was
receiving a series of vivid impressions of a really superior
man—competent, intelligent, resourceful.  He thought about himself
never; he could not be daunted or baffled.  His broad-mindedness was no
longer marred by the sex narrowness that had made appreciation of it
impossible to her, to any woman of her sort.  He knew so much; he
carried knowledge so lightly. It seemed to her, after much experience of
"learned" men, that knowledge was chiefly power to bore.  His knowledge
was like a rapier of finest steel skilfully used in his duel with his
mysterious masked combatant, the alchemist on guard at nature’s
secretest laboratory.  She felt that he was a man out of a million; yet
she had no sense of embarrassed inferiority.  This general in the army
of exact science, which is the true army of progress, was a democrat,
marched with the soldiers afoot, was their equal.  "If any woman ever
does fall in love with him," thought she, "she will worship him.
But—he’s too impersonal.  We women want something smaller—not a sun
star, but a fire on a hearth."

Now that he was nothing but fellow worker to her, she could look at him
with the friendly impartiality of human being for fellow being.  Piecing
together what she knew of his masculine side and what she could how see
latent in those strong features, those intense nervous energies, she
felt that somewhere there might be a woman equal to concentrating upon
herself what went altogether into the duel for nature’s secrets.  "And
unless she were a great woman, he would burn her up like a match tossed
into a furnace."

This latent capacity of his for love fascinated her. There were even
moments when it tempted her—was like a challenge taunting her womanhood
as confessedly ineffectual.  But at the laboratory she was too busy to
linger over such thoughts; and in her other hours, there was household
routine to compel her attention—and the plans for the great attempt.

At last Carter wrote that he would positively come in two weeks.
"You’ve been splendidly patient with me," Dick said as he showed her the
latter.  "I’ve seen that you were eager to be gone."  As she murmured a
polite denial, he repeated, "Yes, eager—but not in the way to make me
uncomfortable over my selfishness."

"I’ve rarely thought of it while I was down here," said she.  "It was
only in the evenings—and when I happened not to sleep very well."

"It was natural you should be upset," sympathized Dick.  "Who wouldn’t
be, standing on the edge of the icy plunge so long?  But you’ll like
it—and everything’ll come out all right.  I’ve discovered that you have
a lot of common sense—and that’s more than I can say for most
men—including myself."

Another month, at the farthest, and she would be in New York, would have
made the great beginning! ... Should she send Basil word as soon as she
arrived?  Should she wait until she got her bearings?  She saw it would
be wiser to wait.  Everything depended on beginnings—right
beginnings—and it would be the right beginning for Basil to find her as
obviously master of her own destiny, as free to withhold or to give, as
was he himself.  Also—  Coming from a small town in the West, she could
not but feel strange in New York, and look provincial.  "Yes, I’ll
wait," she decided, the instant this last reason dropped into the
balance.  For, she had not the vanity that underestimates the matter of
looks and neglects the fact that everyone is at a distinct disadvantage
in a strange environment.

One morning, about a week later, there came a ring at the telephone
which was in Dick’s part of the laboratory. As these calls were always
for her, she rose from her case in the back room and went to answer.  It
was Mazie—"The hotel over to Fenton wants to speak to you, ma’am."

"Connect them, please," said Courtney, hoping her voice had betrayed and
would betray nothing to the man behind her.

Soon came an operator’s voice, and then Basil’s.  "I must see you!"

"Yes," she said.  "I’ll come."

"In your auto runabout—on the Fenton road to Tippecanoe—at two this
afternoon.  Will that do?"

"Yes.  I’ll be there.  Good-by."  And she rang off.

She turned from the telephone with a glance at Richard. He was busy with
the blowpipe—no doubt had not even heard.  As she was leaving to go up
to the house for dinner, she said to him: "I’ll not be back this
afternoon."

"All right," replied he.  "I sha’n’t need you till to-morrow morning."

"I’ll be here, then, of course."

He turned on the high stool.  "You know," said he, with only the
faintest suggestion of the unusual in face and voice, "there’s no reason
why you shouldn’t see anyone you wish, at your own house."

She flushed guiltily.  But her composure instantly returned, and she
went on toward the door, casting about for a reply.

"I’ve no desire to interfere," continued he.  "But—Jimmie went to Fenton
on an errand yesterday, and he happened to tell me he saw at a distance
a man who looked enough like Gallatin to be his twin.  If you should be
seen—you know how they gossip here.  You could send the boy and Helen
over to Wenona for the afternoon.  Pardon my suggesting these things.
It occurred to me you might not realize how closely you’re watched by
everybody, since the divorce."

She stood in the outer doorway, trying to conceal her agitation and
trying to reflect.

"I appreciate you’d rather see him elsewhere—and I’d prefer you did,
too.  But your son has his rights—don’t you think?"

"Yes," said Courtney.  "I’ll see him at the house."

"Thank you," said Richard.  And he resumed his careful mixing of two
powders in a small brass mortar.

She went, returned, stood where she could see his profile. "You give me
your word of honor you’ll not interfere with him in any way?"

Dick smiled without suspending work with the pestle. "Certainly," said
he.  "On my honor I’ll not leave this room until you telephone me that I
may."  His smile broadened into a laugh that made her extremely
uncomfortable, though it was pleasant enough.

"I didn’t think you cared about me or him—or anything but your
chemistry," she said in self-defense.  "I asked simply as a precaution.
I felt I owed it to him and to the boy."

"I laughed—you’ll pardon me—because he’s such a shallow pup.  I never
think of you two that I don’t think of Titania and Nick."

As he tossed this lightly over his shoulder, she was hopelessly at a
disadvantage.  She was scarlet and shaking with anger.  No return thrust
occurring to her, she flung a furious glance into his back and departed,
with about all the joy out of her anticipations of the meeting.  Instead
of telephoning from the house, she ascended to the apartment over the
laboratory and by the direct wire there got the Phibbs Hotel in Fenton.
A few minutes, and Basil was at the other end.  "Come to the house here,
instead," said she.  "At the same time—two o’clock."

A silence, then his voice, "No.  You come over."

"I can’t do it.  And I’d not ask you if I weren’t sure. I’ll explain
when I see you."

"There’s an especial reason why I want you here," urged he.

"And there’s a more especial reason why I want you here."

"And there’s an even more especial reason why I _must_ see you here,"
insisted he.  "It’s very unsatisfactory, talking over the telephone,
with people probably listening all along the wire.  I’ll come
to-morrow—or late this afternoon.  But you come here first."

"No—really, I mustn’t," she declared.  "Don’t you trust me?  Don’t you
know I’d not ask it, if it weren’t perfectly—all right?"

"It isn’t that, but—  I can’t talk about it....  I’ll come."  And from
his tone she knew he had been decided by the fear that she’d think him
afraid.  And then she realized that she had made her remark because she
counted on its appeal to his vanity—and the thought acted upon her
enthusiasm not unlike a douche.




                                *XXVIII*


She was on the drive-front porch with Lizzie, making plausible pretense
of rearranging the boxed evergreens. She heard the carriage turn in at
the gates, though they were nearly a quarter of a mile from the house.
As the horses rounded the bend she looked.  But she waited on Lizzie,
who was not slow to cry out with delighted surprise, "Why, there’s Mr.
Gallatin!"

Courtney said, "Do run in and see that the sitting room’s straight."
Thus, she was alone when he descended. She saw him through a mist and
the hand she gave him was cold, was trembling.  In the doorway, she said
hastily in an undertone: "Helen and Winchie are at Wenona—Richard at the
laboratory.  You’ve stopped unexpectedly on your way south—for an hour
or two."

"I understand," said he.  "I can’t trust myself to look at you.  My
love!  My love!"

She flashed up at him a glance radiant with her florid fancies of
anticipation.  "Come into the house," she contrived to say in an
ordinary tone.

As they went along the hall, side by side and talking for effect on
possible listeners, she saw that he had dressed as carefully as a
bridegroom.  No more carefully than she had dressed, so far as she
dared; still, it struck her as amusing—as suggestive of hollowness.  And
the voice which, as she heard it in fancy during those weeks of waiting,
had been so moving, so magical—what a commonplace voice it was, and how
very like affectation its Eastern intonations sounded.  "That nasty
remark of Richard’s!" she thought.  "How weak of me to let such a thing
affect me."  They entered the sitting room; he quickly closed the door,
caught her hands, looked at her from head to foot.  "Courtney!" he
murmured.  "I love you!  I love you!"

She thrilled, lifted her eyes—dropped them.  A chill stole over her.
She had to resist an impulse to draw her hands away.  He looked really
handsome, was outwardly all her imagination had been picturing—and more.
Yet—  What was the matter?  What was lacking?  Why could she see only
the weakness and coarseness—the qualities that had stood out the night
he was drunk and the next afternoon when she was battling against his
vanity and jealousy?  "It’s my nerves," she decided.  "I’m under a
greater strain than I realize."  When he kissed her, she turned her head
so that his lips touched her cheek.  And immediately she released her
hands.  "We must be careful," she apologized.

"Why?  You’re free."

"Yes—but—"  She paused.

"Why do you act so strange—so distant?"

"I don’t know," she confessed.  She felt ashamed of herself that she was
visiting on him the consequences of her own folly in having let her
imagination overleap all the bounds of probability in forecast.  "I
don’t know," she repeated.  "Nerves, I suppose.  Or, perhaps it’s a bad
cold.  I’ve felt one coming on all day.  This morning I forgot to close
the——"

"Aren’t you glad to see me?"

"Yes—yes, indeed," she protested.  "Let’s sit down."

She took a chair near the table.  He was thus compelled to the sofa,
several feet away.  "We ought to have met where we first arranged," said
he, constrained, embarrassed.

"I have to be careful.  You forget Winchie."

An uncomfortable silence, then he: "You’ve been free thirty-nine days.
Yet you have not written me."

"I explained to you——"

"Didn’t you feel like writing?"

"Of course.  But——"

"But—what?"

"I wanted to be independent as well as free."

He looked at her gloomily.  "Is _that_ what you call love?"

She forced a smile and nodded.

"Do you know what I’ve come for?  For you."

She felt herself drawing together, shrinking away from him.  "For me?"
she echoed vaguely.

"To marry you."

She was not looking at him; but she was seeing his face as it was when
swollen and distorted by drink.  She answered hastily, "Oh, I couldn’t
do that."

"Why not?"

"I can’t marry till—till I’m independent.  I’ve been making a lot of
plans.  I’m going to work early next month."

"What nonsense!" he cried.  "Courtney, do you realize you’ve not yet
said a single word of love?  What is the matter?  Is it our meeting in
this house?"

"Perhaps.  I don’t know.  I don’t understand it myself."  Why was her
mind so perverse?  Why did it thrust at her the things it was unjust to
remember, generous and necessary to forget?  Why was she critical,
aloof, instead of responsive and generously glad?  She went on: "It may
be the cold.  My nose feels queer, and——"

"We must marry, right away," he insisted, frowning upon her lack of
seriousness.  "We’ve been separated too long already."

That seemed to her to explain.  But it did not remove. She said, "Not
until I’m independent."

"But that means years—years!"

"Oh, no," protested she.  "Not the kind of independence _I_ mean.  I
simply want to be sure I could earn my living if it were necessary."

"But it isn’t necessary.  And life is so short, dearest. And at most
we’ll have few enough years of happiness."

"I know," said she, surprised that these truths did not move her in the
least, nor his looks, his tones, so charged with entreaty she such a
short time ago would have found irresistible.  "But I’ve thought it out,
and I realize everything depends on my getting that feeling of
independence.  I’ll not risk again what I’ve been through."

"You know very well, that couldn’t happen.  As for your working, why,
dear, unless a woman’s been bred to making a living, it’s almost
impossible for her."

"Nevertheless I must try."

"If you loved me, you’d not talk like this," cried he, bitterly.

Instead of protesting, she became thoughtful.  "Do you really think so?"
she asked.  "I wonder if that’s true."

"Certainly not," retreated he, alarmed.  "We love each other.  But your
way of acting and talking has upset me. I ought not have come here.  We
should have met over at Tippecanoe."

"You don’t seem to see my point of view, Basil."

"I do, but it’s a mere notion.  A very fine notion," he hastened to add,
though he could not make his tone other than grudging, "but foolish."

"It was my dependence that put me in such a frightful position with
Richard.  And——"

"Courtney," he interrupted, between anger and appeal, "please don’t
repeat that comparison of what you were to him and what you and I are to
each other.  It—hurts me, and it’s not fair."

"Would you promise to love me always just as you do now?"

"I certainly would.  I shall."

She lowered her eyes.  Her heart sank.

"Wouldn’t you?" he asked.

"No," replied she.  "How can I—or anyone—honestly say how he or she’ll
feel about a person they don’t know through and through—a month
ahead—let alone a year—ten years—twenty?  You know that’s true, Basil.
You’re not honest with yourself—or with me."

He was silent, was watching her with sullen, suspicious eyes.

"It seems to me," she went on, "that love—real love—ought to make you
careful.  If we were a boy and a girl, without experience or
intelligence or anything but hazy, rosy emotions——"

"You and I never will agree about love," he interrupted, impatiently.
"But that’s a small matter.  The only point is that we love each other.
Love’s like a rose, Courtney.  Tear it apart to see what it’s made of
and you lose the rose and have only withered petals."

"Yes—one kind of love.  But is it the kind to build one’s life upon?"

"I’m not going to argue with you.  Have your way, if you will.  You’ll
soon get enough of work—of this fantastic idea of independence, as you
call it.  As if I’d not be too afraid of losing your love not to respect
your rights and consider you always and in every way."

"But suppose _I_ ceased to love _you_—and were dependent on you——"

"I know.  I know.  Don’t let’s argue it.  Go on with your plans.  The
sooner you begin, the sooner you’ll see how foolish you are.  You don’t
appreciate what work means—especially for a woman—the toil, the
humiliations, the downright miseries—that cost youth and looks and
health."

It still further depressed her to see how swiftly his words depressed
her—how appalling was the lift and spread of the mountain she had been
dreaming of removing with one shovel and one pair of feeble hands.
"Instead of discouraging me," cried she with some anger in her reproach,
"you ought to be encouraging me.  I should think you’d be afraid to have
a woman about who might be your wife for the sake of a living—might be
making a hypocrite of herself and a fool of you."

He winced; she saw he was thinking of Richard.  "That could never happen
with _us_!" cried he.

"Never is a long time."

He was squirming in irritation and impatience—and was obviously afraid
she would suspect the thoughts he yet could not conceal.  "Please don’t
insist on discussing this, Courtney.  Go ahead.  Try your scheme.  Work!
I never heard of a woman at work who wouldn’t do almost anything to
escape."

She forced a laugh.  "Then if I fail and send for you, you’ll know what
it means—and fly in the other direction."

"Not I," replied he with an overenergy that failed in its purpose of
hiding the discomfort her suggestion had caused him.  "I tell you, we
love each other.  That makes everything different."  He laughed.  "Work!
Thank God, you and I don’t have to work.  We can love."

She sat with eyes down and fingers idly matching the corners of her
little handkerchief.  What a difference between work as a dream and work
in the doing!—between imagining the glories of self-respecting
independence and making the coarse, cruel struggle step by step up to
those glories—between work as a pastime and work as a necessity.  How
unpractical she had been!  She sighed.  "I wish," said she, "I’d never
realized that to be secure a woman must be independent.  But—now that
I’ve realized it, I’ve got to go on."

He put on an expression of pretended deep and respectful interest that
made it hard for her to hide her amusement.  "What are your plans?" he
asked.

"I’ll tell you sometime.  I don’t feel in the humor now."

"Something vague—eh?"  And she saw that he assumed she was only
pretending, after all.  A superior man-to-woman smile had replaced his
look of nervousness.

She waited until he had got himself comfortably settled down into this
agreeable assumption, then said tranquilly, "No.  I have the place
promised me."

He rose impatiently.  If she had needed proof as to his real opinion of
women—his conviction of their inferiority, his expression would have
given it.  Yes, his opinion was the same as Richard’s—always had been,
as she could now see, recalling remarks he had made from time to time.
The same prejudices as Richard; only, Basil had been less
courageous—less honest.  Those prejudices irritated her in Richard; in
Basil they seemed laughable.  But he was getting his impatience and
scorn, his exasperation against her poor womanish folly somewhat under
control.  "Now, Courtney, can’t you realize—" he began in a
teacher-to-infant tone.  Then, a new thought struck him.  He broke off
abruptly.  "No—go ahead.  It’s just as well you should have the lesson,"
said he.

"Should learn how dependent I am on—some man?"

"How unfitted you are to be anything but a lady."

"I know that already," replied she forlornly.  "Or, rather, I’m not
fitted to be either dependent or independent."

"Then why not be sensible, and marry me at once?"

She did not answer.  She could not tell him the truth; she would not
tell him a lie.  Anyhow, she wasn’t sure what she did think.

"You will—won’t you, dear?  You’ll not waste time that we might give to
love and happiness?"  And he anxiously watched her face—with its sweet
feminineness that gave him hope, its mystery and its resoluteness that
made him uneasy.

"It’s a temptation," she said, absently.  She saw herself trying for
independence and failing—losing heart, self-respect—growing cynical
through hardship—marrying Basil to escape—  Just there, she suddenly
surprised her elusive real self, saw deep into the inmost workings of
her own mind—saw that she did not care for Basil Gallatin—that she had
really been pretending to herself that she loved him because he was the
alternative, the refuge, should her try for independence fail!

"I’ll tell you what let’s do," she heard him saying. "Let’s get married.
Then you can take that place, whatever it is.  With your future secure
no matter what happened, you’d work better and would be much more likely
to succeed."

The appeal of this subtle proposal awakened her to her peril.  It must
be now or never; she must speak the truth now, or lose the courage and
the strength to speak it. "Basil," she said abruptly, "I don’t love
you."

He stared.

"I’ve been lying to myself and to you.  I don’t love you."

"That’s not true!"

"I never did love you," she replied—for, with the one truth out, the
other forged to the front and made its amazing self visible.  "No—I
never did love you."  How plain it all was, now!  How strange that she
should for even an infatuated moment have believed this was the man she
needed, the man who needed her—not words alone, and kisses and thrills,
but real need—for mind and heart and body—all that the three have to
give and long to give and to receive.

He stood before her, looking down in graciously smiling remonstrance.
"That’s a little too much," he said tenderly. "You can’t have forgotten
all we’ve been to each other—those hours of happiness—those moments of
ecstasy—my love—my Courtney——"

There was color in her cheeks, an answering tenderness in the eyes that
lifted to his.  "No, I’ve not forgotten. And as I had to learn and as
there’s no other way for woman or man to learn but experience, I don’t
regret.  But we were both in love with love—not with each other.  And
what’s more, we never could be."  Now that she had flung away pretense,
its veil of illusion over her sight dropped; she was seeing him as she
looked at him—not his qualities that repelled, not his qualities that
attracted, but the whole man—was seeing him as we see only those toward
whom are amiably indifferent.  She was thinking, "What a nice, well-bred
man he is, but how small."  Not bad, not grossly sensual, not mean—not
at all mean, but the reverse. Just small.

He began to recover from the stupefaction of the convincing tones of her
denial of love.  He was hastily donning the costume of pose that is
correct for such occasions. She beamed genially upon him and said, "Now,
don’t work yourself up, my dear Basil.  Sit down over there, and let’s
talk quite quietly—and naturally."

It is impossible for anyone with any sense of humor whatever to indulge
alone in paroxysms of emotion before a tranquil spectator.  Basil
stopped rolling his eyes and dilating his nostrils, and seated himself,
in no very good humor.  Her tone was not pleasant.  It would have been
perfectly proper for a man to use to a woman.  It was impertinent, in
weaker sex to stronger.  "Oh, I’m all right," said he, crossly, as he
seated himself.  "But you’d better look out about those ideas of yours.
They have a terribly unfeminizing effect on women."

"Yes—I guess they do," replied she.  A puzzling, alluring combination of
seriousness and humor she looked as she sat there opposite him, her
elbows on the arms of the chair, her chin resting upon the backs of her
linked fingers, her eyes fixed gravely yet somehow quizzically upon him.
"Have you ever thought of our life together?" asked she.  "Of what we’d
do—between times?"

"Between times?"

"No one—not even the most ardent lovers—can make love all the time.
There haven’t been any ’between times’ in our life heretofore, because
of the circumstances.  But when we were together without
interruption—with no excitement or interest of danger—with no
stimulus—with just ourselves—what would we do ’between times’?—and
there’d be more and more ’between times’ as we got used to each other."

This uninviting but obviously truthful picture sobered and exasperated
him.  "Haven’t thought about it," he confessed.  "I haven’t gone into
details.  But I know we’ll be happy.  You’ll step into the position you
are entitled to and I can see that you get."

"The social position, you mean?"

"Certainly.  And we’ll enjoy ourselves."

He could not possibly have said anything that would have shown more
clearly the width and depth of the gap between them—how little he
understood her, how little they had in common.

"You’ll be tremendously popular," he said with enthusiasm.

She shook her head slowly.  "I don’t think _I_ could be happy, wasting
my life, scattering myself among a lot of inane pastimes."  She laughed
a little.  "You’d be horribly disappointed in me, Basil."

"I’ll risk it.  They’ll be crazy about you in the East."  He nodded
proud, confident, self-complacent encouragement. "I’ll risk it!"

She met his look with a quiet final "But I’ll not."  In another mood his
proposal, his manner, his very poor sort of pride in her would have
amused her.  But as she listened, she remembered all she had believed
about this man, all her idealizing of his mind and character.  And she
grew sad and sick.  This small man!

He planted himself firmly before her.  "Now, look here, Courtney.  It’s
useless for you to talk that sort of thing.  You don’t mean it.  And I’m
not going to give you up.  You’re my wife, Courtney.  The only possible
excuse for what you did was that you loved me."

"On the contrary," replied she, "my only excuse is that I was swept away
by my craving for love—for what Richard in our brief honeymoon had
taught me to need——"

"For God’s sake!" he cried.  "How _can_ you say such things?"

"Because they are the truth," she answered with quiet dignity; and he
felt ashamed of himself without knowing why.  "Basil, you don’t love me
as I really am.  You find me shocking.  And I don’t love you as you
really are.  I find you—"  She hesitated.

"Go on.  Say it."

But what would be the use?  The truth, all of it, any literal part of it
would only hurt him, would not awaken him.  By birth and by breeding and
by the impassable limitations of his mind he was incapable of learning
or appreciating the truth, was wedded forever to the morality that makes
truth a vice and lies a virtue.  So, she evaded. "I find you are like
your dress," answered she, her eyes and her light tone taking the sharp
sting off her words. "A charming style of your own but strictly
conventional withal."

He did not fully appreciate this faint hint of the truth, but he
understood enough to be irritated.  "You’ve been doing too much of what
you women call thinking.  And you’ve become like all women who try to
think."

"All women think," said she.  "But very few of them tell the man what
they think—until they’ve got him safely married.  You ought to thank me
for being candid in advance."

He scowled at her smile.  "I’m not going to give you up," he said
sullenly.  "I know you better than you know yourself.  You’ll come out
of this mood. And—dearest—remember that, in spite of your disdain, the
old-fashioned woman—tender, simple, loving—is far sweeter than these
thinkers—gets more pleasure—gives more."

"A baby’s sweeter than a grown person," replied she, refusing to be
serious.  "But, Basil, the time has about passed when even a woman can
stay on a baby—though most of the men and women pretend it isn’t so, and
a good many of them—like you and Helen—get angry if the truth’s forced
on you.  At any rate, _I_ can’t be a baby anymore....  Do you know what
would happen if I married you?"

The look that accompanied her abrupt question was so penetrating, so
significant that he paled.  "I don’t want to hear any more of your
truths that aren’t true at all," he cried.

"I see you know what would happen.  The same thing again."

"Courtney!—Good God!"

"The same thing again.  As long as my craving for real companionship was
unsatisfied, I couldn’t be content. The same delusion that made me fancy
I loved you would trap me again—or, perhaps it wouldn’t be delusion but
really the man I needed—the man who needed me.  A mirage isn’t a
delusion, you know.  It’s an actuality that we mislocate.  I’d hunt
on—and on—through the desert for my oasis—until I found it."

He had not taken his fascinated gaze from her dreamy face, her eyes of
unfathomable emerald.  "Do you mean that?" he said huskily.  "No—you
can’t. But you must not say those things, Courtney—you really mustn’t.
You’ll make me afraid of you. As it is, I fear I’ll have a hard time
making myself forget."

"I don’t want you to forget.  And I’ve told you the exact truth because
I want you to realize how unsuited we are to each other."

He walked up and down in violent agitation.  "I don’t understand it," he
muttered.  "Has some one—Courtney, do you love some other man?"

"I do not.  I’ve seen no one practically but Richard."

He halted with a jerk.  "Richard!" His eyes narrowed with jealous
suspicion.  "Has he been trying to win you back?"

She smiled at the idea, so at variance with the facts. "He treats me
like another man."

"Then you see him?"

"Every day.  I work at the laboratory with him."

"_What!_"  Basil stared, dropped to the nearest chair dumfounded.

"Why not? ... Don’t be so pitifully conventional, Basil.  This is the
twentieth century, not the Dark Ages. He knows you’re here now—asked me
to see you here rather than where it might cause gossip."

As he recovered, his mind, seen clearly in his features, slowly took
fire.  "And you pretended you were telling me the truth!" he cried,
starting up.  Everything else—doubt of her—doubt of himself—all was
forgotten in the torrent rush of jealousy.  "And I, poor fool, believed
you! But I’ll tell you what the truth is.  You’ve lost your nerve. You
love me as you did.  But you haven’t the courage to break off here.  And
you’re sinking back to what you were when I found you.  I might have
known!  A woman always belongs to the nearest man."  He was raging up
and down the room.  "I’ve come for you.  I’ll not go without you. You’re
mine—not his.  I’ll show you!  I’ll show you!"  And he snatched his hat
from the sofa and rushed out.

For the moment motion was beyond her power.  She saw him dart along the
veranda, past the windows, take the path to the Smoke House.  Terror
galvanized her.  She flew to the private telephone, rang long and
vigorously, put the receiver to her ear.  A pause; she was about to ring
again when Richard’s voice came: "Yes—what is it?"

"He’s coming to you, Richard," she gasped.  "I angered him.  He’s wild
with rage.  Promise you won’t let him in."

"I can’t do that."  Richard’s voice was calm and natural.

"Your promise to me!"

"Don’t be alarmed.  He doesn’t amount to much, if you’ll pardon my
saying so."

"I’m coming as quickly as I can.  Don’t see him, Richard.  Remember
Winchie!"

"Come if you like.  But I suspect you’ll only aggravate him.  Believe
me, I can take care of him.  Here he is now——"

She dropped the receiver, ran out of the house and along the path.




                                 *XXIX*


As Vaughan hung up the receiver and turned, Gallatin flung open the door
on which he had just rapped a loud challenge.  He scowled at Vaughan;
Vaughan eyed him with the expression that simply looks and waits.  It
was evident Basil expected immediate combat, was ready for it—therefore
altogether unready for the form of encounter less easy.  Dick’s
tranquillity completely disconcerted him. He advanced a step, with an
aggressive, "Well, here I am."

"So I see," replied Dick.

"You’ve been thinking it was cowardice that made me go away.  But it
wasn’t.  And I’ve come to face it out with you.  You had your chance for
her.  You lost her. I purpose to keep her."

"Very well," said Dick.  "She’s free.  Her affairs are none of my
business."  And he sat down at the long table under the windows, glanced
at the electric furnace as if about to resume work.

"But she isn’t free!" cried Gallatin.  "You’ve not freed her, though she
has the right to it.  You’re holding on to her through the boy."

Dick bent over the white crystals in the platinum tray on the shelf of
the furnace.

Gallatin, exasperated, waved his fists.  "I demand that you free her!
If she were free, she’d come with me, for she loves me."

Dick took a metal rod from the case and began pushing the crystals this
way and that carefully.

"She loves me, I tell you!"

Without pausing or looking round Dick said: "If you say that again—I’ll
begin to believe it isn’t so.  There’s no accounting for
tastes—especially for tastes feminine. But—"  He did not finish; over
his face drifted a slight smile more eloquent against Basil’s
deficiencies than the fiercest stream of epithet.

"I’ve won her," taunted Gallatin, in wild fury, yet as if restrained by
an invisible leash.  "I’ve got her heart. You might as well release the
rest."  As Dick seemed now quite absorbed and unconscious of his
presence, he advanced still nearer.  "By God, you shall!" he cried.
"She belongs to me, and I’m here to maintain my rights at any cost."

Vaughan laid down the long rod with a gesture of deliberate precision
and care, turned slowly toward him.  His long handsome face was of a
curious transparent pallor. His rather deep-set gray-blue eyes looked
coldly and cruelly at his one-time guest and partner.  "You evidently
don’t understand," said he.  "There are times when one must either
ignore—or kill."

Basil sneered, "Well?" said he, with intent to draw on.

"I have been choosing to ignore.  At first it would have given me the
greatest pleasure to kill you.  Now—you are to me much like the cur that
barks and snaps at passers by."  He rose.  "You’ve come here to try to
make a vulgar scandal.  You’ll not succeed.  You have nothing to lose.
I can’t give you your deserts without hurting my son.  So—"  Dick
paused, seemed to be reflecting.

"You hide behind him—do you?" sneered Basil.  In his frenzy he felt that
one or the other must die then and there or he himself would be forever
dishonored.

Dick apparently had not heard.  In an abstracted way he said, to
himself, not to Gallatin, "Yes, I think that will do."  Again there was
a pause, he thinking, Gallatin held silent and expectant by his
expression.  Suddenly Dick said sharply, "Yes—that will do."  He moved
the ladder to the south wall, mounted; he took from the high top shelf a
jar of heavy glass, about one third full of dark red powder; he
descended with it.  "Close that door and lock it," he ordered.

Basil, from habit of association with him as assistant, moved to obey.
Hand on knob and about to swing the door, he hesitated, turned.  "What
are you going to do?" he demanded.

"When you lock that door," replied Dick, "I shall empty what’s in this
jar into the bowl of water there, and in a few seconds we shall both be
dead."

Basil shrank; a shudder ran visibly over his frame.

"I could kill you without killing myself," continued Dick, "and cover
the scandal with the pretense of accident. It would serve you right,
but—somehow it strikes me as cowardly.  So—lock the door."

Basil was no coward; but he had grown yellow with fear.  His hand now
dropped nervously from the knob.

"Lock the door," said Dick sharply.  "There’s no time to lose.  I think
she’s on the way here."

"She’ll understand—and kill herself."

"Why not?  Helen will take care of Winchie."

Basil’s gaze wandered round, in search of another excuse.  He braced
himself, cried defiantly, "I refuse!"

"Very well."  Dick set the jar on the table.  "Then go."

"You think I’m a coward.  But it’s not that."

Dick shrugged his shoulders.  "I know you’re a coward. Everyone is.  I’m
as well pleased that you don’t accept.  I’ve no wish to die,
particularly for such an absurd, stagy notion of honor.  But I will not
have a scandal——"

Just there Courtney dashed in, her expression so disheveled that it gave
her the air of being disheveled in dress.  Her glance darted from
Richard leaning calmly against the table and, in blouse and cap, looking
like a handsome workingman, to Basil in his fashionable English tweeds,
standing shamefaced and irresolute near the door—so near that she had
brushed him as she entered.  On Basil her gaze rested like a withering
blight.  Her eyes flashed green fire; her every feature hurled at him
the scorn that despises.  "You shabby coward!" she said, her voice low
and threatening to break under the weight of its burden of fury.  "You
who come here and try to ruin my child and me for your vanity!"

"Courtney!" he pleaded, not daring to lift his eyes. "I love you.  I
cannot give you up."

"Love!  You don’t know what it means!  You weak vain thing!  You found
you couldn’t have me on equal terms.  So you thought you’d degrade
me—compel me."  She turned on Richard.  "And you, too!" she blazed. "If
you were a man you’d kill him—you’d kill us both—with some of your
chemicals there—and protect Winchie by saying it was an accident."

"Absurd," said Vaughan with an indifferent shrug.  His arms were folded
upon his broad chest.

Trembling and blazing, she went up to him.  "Look at me!" she cried, her
hands on her surging bosom, her eyes glittering insanely up at him.
Every instinct of prudence, the instinct of self-preservation itself had
succumbed under the surge of elemental passion, of frenzied shame that
she should have lowered herself to such a man as this Basil Gallatin.
"This body of mine," she said in a voice of terrible calm, "it’s been
his—that thing’s—do you hear?  He has had me in his arms—me—your
wife—the mother of your boy—he—that creature quaking there.  And I have
kissed him and caressed him and trembled with passion for him as I never
did for you....  Now, will you kill us?"

He did not move.  But slowly the veins and muscles of his face
tightened, pushed up against, strained against the ghastly whiteness of
his skin.  And slowly his eyes lighted with the fires of a demoniac fury
that made hers seem like a child’s weak hysteria.  She gazed at him,
fascinated. Then, with a gasp, she braced herself and waited for the
frightful death that look of his signaled.  But she did not flinch, nor
shift her gaze from his.  To Gallatin, paralyzed, watching them with
eyes starting and lips ajar, it seemed an eternity while they stood thus
facing each other in silence.  Then, as slowly as that expression on
Richard’s face had come it departed, like a fiend fighting inch by inch
against being flung back into the hell from which it had issued at the
call of her dreadful taunts.  The face remained deathly white; but those
were Richard Vaughan’s own eyes that gazed down at the small, delicate
face of the woman, in them a look that filled her with awe, made her
ashamed, gave her the impulse to sink down at his feet and burst into
tears.

"No, Courtney," Richard said, infinite gentleness in his tone.  "I’m
neither god nor devil.  I—all three of us—will do to-day what to-morrow
we’ll be glad we did.  One can always die.  But living again, once one’s
dead—that’s not so simple."

There fell silence.  She stood before him, bosom still heaving but eyes
down.  Vaughan turned to Gallatin with a courtly politeness like his
grandfather’s.  "Don’t you think you’d better go—for the present at
least?"

Gallatin, who had been awed also, hesitated.  He looked at Courtney; his
jaws clenched and he fixed sullen, devouring eyes on her.  "I want to
talk to her alone," said he aggressively.

"That’s for her to decide," said Richard.

Courtney lifted her head to refuse.  Then it occurred to her that, by
talking with Basil, she might settle the whole business for good and
all.  With a curious deference she looked inquiringly at Richard.  He
shrugged his shoulders, began pushing the tray into the furnace.  She
let her eyes rest on Basil, said "Yes—that’s best.  Come on."  She went
out of the laboratory, Basil following her.  Richard closed the door
behind them.  At the edge of the clearing she halted, wheeled upon him.
"Well!" she began, her voice as merciless as her eyes.

He was a pitiful spectacle.  His feature were working in a ferment of
many unattractive emotions—jealousy, pique, fear that he was ridiculous,
wounded vanity, desire to regain with her the ground he felt he must
have lost. "You see now, Courtney," he said, aggressive yet pleading,
too, "he doesn’t care a rap about you."

"Well?" she repeated.  Her tone was much softer; her nerves were
calming, and her temper was yielding to her sense of proportions.  Also,
the man looked weak and shallow and ridiculous—not worth the while of a
great emotion.  Just small.  "What of it?" she asked.

He scowled in angry embarrassment at her expression which neither
suggested nor encouraged tragedy. "I never heard of people acting as
we’ve acted to-day!" he cried.

"But no doubt they often do," replied she.  "Everybody doesn’t act—all
the time—as if he were in a novel or a play, or thought he was."

"You can respect him after this?"

Her eyes had the expression a man least likes to see in a woman’s when
she is looking at him.  "Don’t you?" said she.

He reddened, and his eyes shifted.  Presently he said humbly, "I—I am
sorry for what I did.  I was crazy with jealousy.  I’m not myself—not at
all."

She felt the truth of this at once.  "And I’m sorry for the things I
said to you and to him.  I was crazy with rage."

He lifted his head eagerly.  "I knew you didn’t mean them, dear."

Her brow darkened.  It was annoying that the man couldn’t realize; for
such as she now knew him to be to aspire to her seemed impertinence.
"Basil," she said, "it’s all over between us.  Don’t let your vanity
deceive you.  And don’t force me to tell you what I think of you.  Be
content with knowing what I don’t think."

"Be careful!" he cried angrily.  "I’m not the man to stand and beg—even
for you."

"That’s good," said she pleasantly.  "Then—we can part here and now."
She glanced up at the windows of the apartment.  "You’ve got your traps
up there still. Hadn’t you better let me send Jimmie to help you pack
them?"

"Thank you," replied he, haughtily.  "I’ll be obliged if you will."

She put out her hand.  "Good-by, Basil."

He clinched his fists in vanity’s boyish anger.  "You can think of that
apartment, and have no feeling?" he exclaimed.

"None," declared she.

"I’ll not believe it.  You couldn’t be so unwomanly."

Her look forecast a sarcasm.  But before she spoke it changed to one
that was soft and considerate.  She felt that she was responsible.  True
he had posed as something far superior to his reality; but it was an
honest fraud, deceiving himself first and most of all.  She felt to
blame for having been taken in—felt repentant and apologetic toward him.
"Let’s not quarrel," she urged.  "Don’t be harsh with me.  I know you’ll
find love and make some woman very, very happy—one that is sympathetic
and comes up to your ideals of womanhood."  She put out her hand again,
and friendly and winning was the smile round her wide mouth, in the eyes
under the long, slender brows. "Please, Basil."  He hesitated.  "Don’t
be harsh.  You know you don’t love me any more than I love you.  What’s
the use of pretenses?  Why not part sincerely? ... Please, Basil."

His hand just touched hers and his angry eyes avoided her pleading
glance.  "If you’ll send Jimmie," he said. And with a stiff bow he moved
in great dignity along the path to the apartment entrance.  He went even
more slowly than dignity required, for he confidently expected she would
come to her senses when she saw he had indeed reached the limit of
endurance of her trifling.  Richard had shown he wouldn’t take her
back—cared nothing for her. Where then could she turn but to him?  And
all that vaporing about independence was—just vaporing.  A woman was a
woman, and he knew women.  So, he walked slowly to give her a good
chance.  But no call came—not though he lingered over opening the door
and made a long pause elaborately to wipe his clean boots on the mat.
He did not look until he could do so from the security of the
sitting-room windows.  She was not in sight.  Had she followed him
softly?  He went into the hall, glanced down the stairs.  Not there!
She had gone! ... She meant what she said; she had cast him off.  There
was no room for doubt—she had cast him off....  He heard a step, rushed
to the door.  It was Jimmie, come bringing his overcoat and gloves, and
prepared to do the packing.  She had really cast him off.

"God!" he muttered.  "What a contemptible position that puts me in!"
And, for the moment at least, he hated her.  If he could only revenge
himself—in some perfectly gentlemanly way, of course.  Once that day
vanity had lured him clean over the line into most ungentlemanly
conduct; his face burned from the sting of her remembered
denunciations—the sting of truth in them.  If he could devise a
gentlemanly way—something that would convince her he had made all that
agitation simply because he felt that, as a gentleman, he in the
circumstances must go to any lengths to keep faith with her.  Yes, that
would be a handsome revenge—and would save his face, too.

He gave Jimmie the necessary directions and resumed his brooding.  He
searched his brain in vain.  He could contrive no way of escape; he
would have to leave that place like a whipped dog—yes, a whipped dog.
Spurned by Vaughan—spurned by Courtney——

A step, and the rustle of a skirt.  His eyes gleamed. "I thought not!"
he muttered exultantly.  "Well, I’ll teach her a lesson she’ll never
forget."

He turned his back to the door, stood at the window, looking out and
puffing nonchalantly at his cigarette.  The step, the rustle were on the
threshold.  "I beg your pardon, Mr. Gallatin——"

He wheeled to face Helen.  His confusion was equal to hers.  "Ah—Miss
Helen—I—I—" he stammered.

"Am I intruding?" she asked.  There was a charming blush in her sweet,
beautiful face, and her honest dark eyes showed how perturbed she was.

"No indeed—no indeed," he protested.

"Courtney sent me——"

"Courtney sent you!" he exclaimed in amazement.

"She told me all about it," Helen hastened on.  "She asked me to let you
know that she had told me—how you and Richard have had a bitter falling
out over the work—and that you’re going away, not to come back."

One look into those eyes was convincing; Helen believed what she was
saying.

"She thought perhaps I might be able to help you about the packing.  Can
I?"

"No, but I’d be glad if you’d stop while Jimmie is doing it.  I don’t
want to leave without saying good-by to you."

All the roses fled from Helen’s cheeks.  "Yes—certainly," she murmured.

"You’ll excuse my being somewhat confused?  The truth is I’m very much
upset."

"I can’t tell you how dreadfully I feel," said Helen. "Are you sure you
and Richard—"  She paused.  Her glance stirred him like an angel face in
a drunkard’s dream—her face earnest, grieved, sympathetic, unable to
credit anything so dreadful, so wicked as a parting in hate.

"Quite sure.  It’s—final.  Please, let’s not talk about it.  It’s all
so—so revolting."

In presence of those clear, noble eyes of hers, the sordidness of his
"romance" now once more began to stand out.  What a mess!  No wonder he
had taken to drink.  If it had been Helen and the kind of love she
inspired—  "But you and I will always be friends—won’t we?" he said to
her.

Her eyelids dropped and he saw her bosom fluttering. "I hope so," she
said so low he scarcely heard.  She was pale now, and drooping.  "Though
I’m afraid—when you get away off there, you’ll forget me very soon."

His heart smote him as he looked at that tall, voluptuous figure, at
that lovely face, so regular, so pure.  Here was a woman, a real woman,
and she would have loved him—perhaps did love him.  "I know I’m unworthy
of a thought from you who are so good and pure," he said.  "But your
kindness to me has helped me.  And God knows, I shall need help."  Oh,
that it had been his lot to anchor to this strong, white soul!  How much
nobler than the finest passion was a love centering about the sweet,
old-fashioned ideals.  What a haven those arms, that bosom would be! He
felt dissolute and sin-scarred as only a vain young man can feel those
dread but delightful depravities.

"You must not despair, Basil," came in Helen’s soft voice, like oil upon
his wounds.  And it touched him to see how, maidenly shy though she was,
she yet could not resist the appeal of this opportunity to try to do
good.  She went on, "It’s always darkest before dawn, and the more rain
falls the less there is to fall."

These words seemed like heavenly wisdom delivered by a messenger of
light.  He sighed.

"You’ll come out all right—and will escape from that—that—whatever it
is—"  Helen’s cheeks modestly colored—"and be happy with some _good_
woman who is worthy of you."

She looked so sad, so beautiful that before he knew it he, ever
sympathetic with women, had said, "Some woman like you, Helen."

She turned away.  He saw that her emotions were making her tremble.  How
she loved him!  What a prize such a love would be—and how chagrined
Courtney would feel—Courtney the vampire woman who had tried to destroy
him, and thought she had succeeded—and was gloating over his misery.
"If we’d had the chance, Helen, how happy we could have made each other!
But I mustn’t talk of that."

"Why not?" said she, with bold shyness.  "I know that for some reason we
can never be anything more to each other.  But it’s been a happiness—"
earnestly, with tears in her eyes of the Homeric Juno and in her voice
young and honest and sympathetic—"a real happiness to feel that the best
of you—the part that’s really you—found something to like in me."

He thrilled.  Here was a woman!  And a woman who appreciated him.  He
wondered how he could have lingered under a malign spell when such
beauty of soul—and body, too—was his for the asking.  "Helen!" he cried.
And all his wounded heart’s longing and all his wounded vanity’s
suffering gave energy to his cry.  He took her hand; he put his arm
round her.  Her cheek touched his.  How cool yet warm she was!  How
lovely and sweet!  And the unsullied, untouched down!  How fresh!
Except her male relatives, no doubt no man but himself had ever kissed
her—  "Helen—Helen!  God forgive me, but I can’t refuse this moment of
pure happiness."

She gently drew away.  "Oh, Basil," she sobbed. "And I had said no man
should ever kiss me until—  But you—it seems different.  You are so
noble—so pure minded."  Her eyes gazed into his with a trustful
adoration that thrilled him.

"Helen—do you love me?" he cried.

Her honest eyes opened wider.  "Would I have let you touch me if I
didn’t?"

"Yes—I know that!" he exclaimed.  "How pure you are!  It’s like heaven
after hell."

She gazed on into his eyes.  A faint flush overspread her pale cheeks.
She kissed him.  "I love you, Basil," she said, gravely.  Then all at
once the color surged wave on wave over her brow, her cheeks, her neck.
She hung her head, slowly drew away from his detaining vibrating arms.
There is a time for lighting a fire; there is a time for leaving it to
burn of itself.  Helen had by the guidance of feminine instinct hit upon
exactly the right instant for drawing back.  She released herself,
avoided his touch just when passion having captured his imagination
swept on to the conquest of the flesh.  At the edges of her lowered eyes
appeared two tears to hang glistening in the lashes. From her bosom rose
a sigh, soft, suppressed but heart-breaking.

The bright flame was leaping in his eyes.  "You noble, splendid woman!"
he cried, as his glance leaped from charm to charm—from delicate,
regular features to sumptuous yet girlish figure.  "What a jewel—in what
a casket!  You appeal to the best there is in me—only to the best.  If I
become a man again, it will be through you."  And sincerity rang in his
voice; for, the fire of high resolve to be a good man, to be worthy of
this exalted womanhood, was burning in his blood.  "Helen—will you help
me?  I’ve sinned—you never will know how dreadfully. But I love you."

Her answer was a beautiful shaft of the love light from her now
wonderful eyes.

"Helen—will you marry me?"

From head to foot she trembled.  All her color fled, leaving her face
whiter than the milk-white skin of her voluptuous neck and shoulders.
"I—love—you," she said simply.

"Then you will?  Say you will, Helen.  I cannot trust myself to go away
without your strength to help me."

"I will, Basil."

There were tears in his eyes as in hers as he reverently kissed her
hands.  He had a sense of peace, of sin forgiven, of joyous return to
the fold of honor and respectability.  And her heart was overflowing
with love, with gratitude to him and to God.




                                 *XXX*


Returning to the house after full two hours, she burst excitedly in upon
Courtney, who was at her easel in the upstairs sitting room.  Courtney
had by much experimenting found that of her several possible indoor
occupations painting was far the best sedative for mind and nerves.  The
girl’s face, exultant with pride, exalted with love, gave her a shock;
for, only complete triumph could have so roused those regular, chastely
cool features from their wonted repose.  She had on impulse sent Helen
to Basil in vague hope that they, admirably suited because each needed
just what the other had to give, possibly might somehow get a start in
the direction of making a match of it.  She had the most convincing of
reasons for believing that the heart in need of balm is the most
susceptible to it.  But she did not believe that Basil’s heart was, at
least latterly, involved; and, as she had not a glimmer of a suspicion
of his stolen draughts of "moral tonic," she could not credit the story
so clearly written upon those radiant features.

"You don’t mean you got him!" she exclaimed, laying her brush on the
rest and leaning back.  And in her amazement and excitement over this
sudden freakish prank of fate, out of her mind flew all the wretched
thoughts over which she had been brooding—thoughts centering about her
own ugly part in that scene at the laboratory.

Helen, undisturbed by this frankness of woman to woman friend, when
there are no listeners, flung ecstatic arms about her and kissed her on
either cheek.  "I’m so happy!" she cried.  "And I owe it all to you."

"Engaged?" inquired Courtney, the utter impossibility of the thing
down-facing the clear evidence of its actuality.

Helen held up her left hand, displaying the old-fashioned diamond ring
Basil had always worn on his little finger.  "It was his mother’s," she
said, regarding it with an expression in the big brown eyes that would
have thrilled him, had he seen.  It thrilled Courtney; and no further
proof of the absolute passing of Basil was needed than the unalloyed
pleasure Helen’s happiness gave her.  "Engaged," said Helen, softly,
dreamily.  "And the day set—the second of June."

"Splendid!"  Helen, she felt, was secure; for, Basil had the highest
respect for his given word.

"And if you hadn’t sent me down there, I do believe it’d never have
happened.  Just think!—though we’ve loved each other practically from
the first meeting.  He says it was his feeling about me that started him
to struggling against that bad woman.  Do you remember——"

"Yes, I remember," said Courtney.  How dead it all was!—dead with the
death that leaves no scar upon the heart, only a lesson in the memory.
How could it ever have seemed living?—and immortal!

"Oh—of course you remember.  You knew about her."

"Not much about her," replied Courtney.  Pensively, "Really, nothing at
all."

"I’m sure I don’t want to know anything.  The less a good woman knows
about evil, the better....  I think recently he must have almost
succeeded in breaking away; for, to-day I’m sure he was hesitating at
the parting of the ways—whether to go back to her or not.  And my coming
there decided him.  Isn’t it beautiful?"

"Like a fairy tale," said Courtney, taking up her brush and eying
critically the little landscape to which she was giving the finishing
touches.  "But, my dear, I don’t think you ought to tell me these
things."

She felt selfish in saying this; Helen had inexperienced youth’s
irresistible craving to confide, and was simply bursting with simple and
innocent vanity over having achieved the double triumph of both
spiritual and worldly advantage.  But Helen was not to be suppressed or
even discouraged.  "Oh, yes," replied she.  "He asked me to tell you we
are engaged.  I think he knows you’ve heard about that woman who was
dragging him down, and thought you could advise me whether he was a fit
man for me to marry.  You see he feels he’s been very bad."

"Men always like to think that," said Courtney.  "But as long as they
think so, they’re not.  No, he isn’t bad, as men go.  He wants to settle
down.  And he will settle down—with you."  She was looking at the
landscape but her quizzical eyes were seeing the pair of them a few
years hence, contentedly yawning at each other, leading the conventional
life of the well-to-do that swathes them body and mind in soft, indolent
fat.

Helen had only half listened to Courtney, as she cared as little as the
next woman about her lover’s past, and knew for herself that he was
high-minded and of the noblest instincts.  She halted her own and
Courtney’s musings with an absent, "I feel that way about it, too."  She
moved nervously about the room, from time to time casting an appealing
glance at her absorbed friend.  Finally she burst out desperately:
"There’s something I want your advice about.  I don’t know whether I’ve
done right or not."

"Yes?" said Courtney, encouragingly.

"I hadn’t told you but—the fact is—while I was on that visit to Saint X,
I—I became engaged to Will Arbuthnot."

Courtney looked laughingly at her over the suspended brush.  "Oh,
Helen—Helen!"

"But let me explain, dear," begged Helen, cheeks scarlet and eyes down.
"When I went up there—and until just a few minutes ago—I thought—"  Her
faltering voice died away altogether.

"Thought there was no hope of getting Basil," said Courtney, with no
censure, with only sympathy.  She resumed touching up the picture to
ease Helen’s embarrassment.  "Go on."

"I thought he was hopelessly in the power of that bad woman.  So, I put
my feeling for him out of my heart....  I know you’re laughing at me.
You’re so cynical, Courtney.  But a girl has got to do the best she can.
And it’s getting harder and harder for a poor girl to marry—that is, to
marry a man with anything.  And brought up as I’ve been I have to have
nice surroundings. I want a good home—and—and—children—and they must be
educated properly—and able to keep their place in our station of life."

"Certainly," reassured Courtney.  "You did the practical, sensible
thing."

"I know, what I did _seems_ to bear out your ideas. You’re always
teasing me about my ideals being mostly pretense.  Well, perhaps they
are.  It does look like it—doesn’t it?"

"Everybody’s are," said Courtney, squinting at the picture.  "Ideals are
paste pearls.  One can wear much bigger and finer ones than of the
real—and nobody knows they’re paste—or need ever know if one’s careful
to avoid their being tested.  I’m glad, dear, you weren’t so foolish as
you always insisted you’d be."

Helen looked as if her soul were freed of a huge weight.  "I will say,
Courtney, that I’d never think of confiding in any person who believes
like me, while I always feel safe in confiding in you."

"Thank you," said Courtney with genuine gratitude. "You don’t know what
a flattering compliment that is.... So, you’re engaged to Will
Arbuthnot?"

"Yes—that is, up at Saint X Will asked me to marry him.  He’s a nice,
clean, thoroughly good fellow.  And when Basil went away I supposed he’d
gone to that bad——"

"I understand," interrupted Courtney.  "Never mind about her."

"I felt I could grow to like Will, and I put Basil out of my heart."
There she fluttered a guiltily uneasy glance at Courtney.

"And now," teased Courtney, "you give the naughty man the preference
over the nice one."

"That’s just it!" exclaimed Helen in triumph.  "Basil needs me.  I did
hesitate—at least, I tried to—until he begged me to strengthen him by
saying yes.  Then I felt it was clearly my duty."  Helen took Courtney’s
amused nod at her landscape as approval.  "And while I hated to do a
thing that in a way might seem deceitful—still, Basil has such an
exalted opinion of me—and it helps him, to feel that way—and if he had
found out that I hadn’t loved him all along—or if I’d asked him to
wait—I might have lost all chance to help him to be the noble, good man—
_Don’t_ smile that way. Courtney."

And Courtney instantly changed her smile to one of tenderness.  "I know
you’re good and sweet, dear—and beautifully sincere," said she, with
perfect honesty; for, experience had left in her little of the familiar
self-complacence that condemns human beings for human traits. "Much too
good for Basil."

"Of course," said Helen, beaming, "a woman who has kept herself pure is
superior to a man who has not been clean and nice."

"Always make Basil feel that," advised Courtney. "He’s the kind of man
that can behave only when he’s on his knees—and you’re the kind of woman
that prefers worship to love....  I suppose you’ll live in the East."

"In New York, I think," replied Helen, reflectively. "He talks of the
country.  But I’ve had enough of that. I’m sure he’d be better contented
in a city."

Courtney laughed gayly.  "What a dear you are!" she exclaimed, looking
at her friend tenderly.  "And so absolutely unconscious of it."

Helen returned her gaze in unaffected surprise.  "I don’t know what you
mean.  Why do you laugh?"

"Nothing."  Courtney was painting again.  "What are you going to do
about Will Arbuthnot?"

"Why, be perfectly honest with him," cried Helen, injured and
reproachful.  "I simply couldn’t be deceitful."

"Tell him you’ve found you can make a better match? Oh, you mustn’t do
that."

"I should think not!" exclaimed Helen, horrified. "That wouldn’t be the
truth.  No, I’ll tell him I find I don’t love him as a woman should love
the man she’s to give herself to.  You know I’ve got the old-fashioned
ideals—that is, ideas—of the sacredness of womanhood.  He’ll
understand."

"Yes," said Courtney gravely, though her eyes were dancing, "he’ll have
a deeper reverence for true womanhood....  Well, the men deserve it.
They’re responsible for our not daring to be our natural human selves."

"But I _am_ natural, dear," remonstrated Helen warmly.

Courtney was busily trying for a shade of brown on her palette.  "You’re
sure Basil won’t hear of your other engagement?  Remember, he knows
several Saint X people."

"I made an agreement with Will that we’d keep it a secret until we got
ready to marry."  Courtney laughed again; it was so obvious what
lingering longing and hope had prompted this precaution.  "What _are_
you laughing at _now_?" asked Helen.

"I wouldn’t spoil your innocence by telling you," replied Courtney.  And
she rose and, palette in one hand, brush in the other, kissed her
affectionately.  "I’m glad you’re happy—and I’m sure you’ll always be
happy."

"Indeed I shall.  And he’ll be happy too.  As he said, he’s lived in an
atmosphere of deceit and falsehood, and he needs to be lifted up into
purity and love and—and—all that makes a good home and life on a high
plane."

Courtney was smiling strangely into her color box. "You’ll be married in
Saint X at Mrs. Torrey’s, I suppose?"

Helen began her answer in a place so remote that Courtney, used as she
was to the complexities of feminine thought, was completely baffled.
Said Helen: "Will Cousin Richard think me disloyal, marrying a man he’s
at outs with?"

Courtney reflected.  "I don’t know what he’ll think." she said.  "But
you’ve got to consider yourself first—and Basil."

"Yes, certainly—"  Again Helen was only half listening. "About the
wedding," she presently said.  "I was thinking it out, while Basil and I
were talking——"

"Helen—Helen!"  And the small head with its auburn crown shook in mock
disapproval.  "Not while he was making his first love to you?"

Helen reddened.  "I had to think about things.  You know, a woman can’t
afford to let herself loose like a man. And I decided it’d be best for
us not to announce the engagement, but just to marry.  And not at Saint
X.  I’ll go up to Aunt Lida’s in Laporte.  What is it, dear?  Why do you
look so queer?"

"Nothing—nothing."  Courtney had no desire—indeed, what would have been
the use?—to tell her thoughts as she viewed the swamp of deceit and
double dealing into which Helen and Basil were dragging each other in
pursuit of those will-o’-the-wisp ideals.  Ideals!  But Courtney’s lip
did not curl in scorn as it would have curled a few months before.  She
had learned that supreme lesson of tolerance—even when you are sure you
are right, not to fancy that what is right for you is right for anyone
else.

"No," Helen was saying, "I’ll not tell Richard.  It would annoy him and
do no good.  Oh, I ought to be ashamed of myself, to be so happy when
you are unhappy."

"I—unhappy?"

"I know you conceal it, dear.  You’re brave and self-reliant. But—
Isn’t there _anything_ I could do to bring you and Dick together again?
You’re a woman, dear. You simply have to be taken care of, and——"

"Don’t shadow your romance with worry about me," said Courtney
nervously.  She was all confusion and restlessness.

"But I can’t help it," pleaded Helen.  "I know Richard was neglectful.
And he’s not an attractive man to a woman, as Basil is—isn’t livable and
lovable like Basil——"

Helen went on and on contrasting the two men, to Richard’s disadvantage
at every point.  In former days she had been too much "afraid Richard’ll
find out how foolish I am and how little I know" to get in the least
acquainted with him; since the divorce they had talked only constrained
commonplaces, when she took Winchie to him. Thus, the comparison was
grotesque distortion of Richard. But Courtney was not tempted to try to
set her right. Helen, of small mentality and in love with Basil, would
not appreciate, would not be convinced, would simply be irritated—would
probably misunderstand and be encouraged to pursue her absurd scheme for
bringing them together. But parallel with Helen’s talk there was in
Courtney’s mind a juster contrasting of the two men—the one strong, the
other weak; the one real, the other idealist; the one simple, the other
a _poseur_; the one intelligent, the other merely conceited; the one
master of his emotions, the other their slave; the one an original, the
other a pattern, an identical sample of thousands turned out by the
"best families" and the "best colleges" and the "best society."  And
then it came to her why she had estimated Basil quickly and accurately,
once she began it—that it was because in Richard she for the first time
had a measure to do her measuring with.  The mists of his abstraction
had completely hid his personality from her, as from everybody.  Those
mists had blown away in the cyclone of the disruption of their marriage,
and he had stood revealed—and Basil also—Basil, the dwarf beside the
giant.  She could see how the lesser man had made what was, in the
circumstances, irresistible appeal to the imperious craving that must be
satisfied before the need of heart for sympathy and of mind for
comradeship could gain a hearing, the craving that in gaining its ends
will compel the imagination to play any necessary sorry trick upon the
intelligence.  She could see this; and she could also see how sorry the
trick upon intelligence had been—how absurd was her dream of founding a
life-long content and happiness upon what Basil could give her and she
Basil.

"I’m sure," Helen was saying, "with a little management you could get
Richard back."

These words fell upon Courtney’s ears just as into her mind again came
that scene between her and Richard at the laboratory—the childish, the
coarse taunts she had hurled at him, and how he had met them.  She was
hot with the shame of it when Helen spoke.  The suggestion that Richard
could be got back overwhelmed her with a crushing, stinging sense of how
in contempt he must hold her now.  The red of her skin flamed up into
scarlet. "Don’t speak of those things," she commanded harshly. Then,
instantly ashamed of this misdirected outburst of temper, she put on her
most careless, frivolous air—put it on well enough to deceive Helen.
"Let’s talk trousseau," said she.  "You haven’t much time, you know.
June’s very near."

But Helen was too curious about the trouble that had so abruptly changed
a friendship into hatred.  "It must have been exciting—that quarrel
between them," she hinted encouragingly.  "You were there, weren’t you?"

"Yes."

"Tell me, Courtney."

"It cured my cold," said Courtney.  "I’d been feeling queer in the nose
and eyes——"

"How _can_ you be so light!" exclaimed Helen.  "Well—let’s talk
trousseau."  She felt that she had done her duty, that it was a waste of
time to try to induce Courtney to be serious—  "She _never_ will have
any sense of responsibility—or of the graver side of life."  And with a
clear conscience she took up trousseau and thought and talked dress
steadily the rest of the afternoon, straight through until the supper
gong sounded.  And she asked so many questions, so much minute advice
about every little detail that Courtney’s attention could not wander.


At supper Courtney got a real pleasure from Helen’s rapt, tenderly
smiling countenance—they could not talk before Lizzie as the engagement
was to be kept secret. Also, she got pleasure mingled with amusement out
of Helen’s delightful swift assumption of the ways of a married woman,
and out of her immense satisfaction—as shown in a certain sweet and
loving condescension to Courtney—over Basil’s superiority as a catch.
Helen was in fancy already married and installed in grandeur.  But after
supper, when Helen went up to write her first love letter—(those to Will
Arbuthnot didn’t count)—Courtney made no attempt to save herself from
the attack of the blues that had been threatening ever since she calmed
sufficiently to recall what she had said to Dick at the laboratory.  She
sat at the piano playing softly.  Helen’s face was haunting her—that
expression telling of dreams she understood so well—so well!  Would
Helen’s dream fade too? Probably—yes, certainly—for, the Helen sort of
woman soon discouraged love in a man, and the Basil sort of man looked
askance at love as tainted of that devil whom no one believed in any
more yet everyone feared. Fade—wither—die.  And she herself—would she
seek on and on, deceived always by hopes and longings—as she had been
twice already—the second time worse deceived than the first——

Into her thoughts came an image of Richard.  The image grew stronger.
Very gradually she realized that he was actually before her, was the
tall figure in the doorway of the sitting room——

"I didn’t dare interrupt," he said.  "It would have been like disturbing
a funeral."

"Not quite so bad as that," replied she with an attempt to smile.
Though her rose-bronze coloring enabled her to blush deeply without
detection, had the corner where she was sitting been less dim he must
have seen into what shamefaced confusion his coming threw her.

She went on playing; he seated himself at some distance from her to gaze
into the fire and smoke.  She was on the grill of humiliating thoughts
about herself—what she had said and done that afternoon.  She did not
lift her eyes until she had made sure by several furtive glances that
she could look at him in safety.  She watched him—the cigarette
gracefully between the long first and second fingers of his hand of the
aristocrat and the artist—the poise of his curiously long head so well
proportioned—the long, sensitive, mobile features—that indescribable
look which proclaims at a glance the man of high intelligence—the man of
the finely organized nervous system.  Then she observed that he was in
evening half dress—one more reason for his looking unusually handsome
and distinguished.  But all the time she was seeing those two
expressions which had transformed him that afternoon—had transformed him
and had made her feel mean and poor beside him.  A man who could be such
a wild hot blast of primeval passion; the man who could be stronger than
passion, even such passion—there was indeed a man! And what must he
think of her!  "But no worse than I deserve."

To break the current of her own thoughts, she interrupted his with a
trivial "You are dressed this evening."

"Because I’ve come to call," he replied, rousing himself from his
reverie.

"I’ll tell Helen."

"I want to talk to you—if you’ll listen."  She stopped the soft
wandering of her fingers over the keys.  "No, go on playing, please."

She resumed.  Now her eyes were on the keyboard, and she was having no
easy task of it finding the right keys and striking the right chords,
all the time conscious of his steady penetrating gaze.  "It’s nearing
the time you fixed for going East," he began.

She nodded slowly in time to the music.  He was so seated that the piano
prevented his seeing any of her but her bare shoulders and graceful head
with its masses of auburn hair, against a background of palms and ferns.
"I’m glad the spring is so backward this year," she said; for, she had
learned not to fear his misunderstanding, if she spoke out her thoughts.
"If it were really spring with the grounds all in bloom and the windows
wide—  It makes me sad to think of that."

She had thought she might perhaps soften his contempt by reminding him
that there was another and a less repellant side to her character.  But
as soon as the words were out, she wished she had not spoken; it was
useless to try to make him think well of her.  He was probably
regretting that he had let her have Winchie.  She looked appealingly
toward him, hoping he would speak—say anything—no matter what, so long
as it broke that silence of painful suspense.  When she could endure it
no longer, she suddenly burst out: "You’ve come to ask me to leave at
once.  You are right, I’ll go as soon as I can pack."

"On the contrary," said he, eyes still intent upon the tall shafts of
flame leaping toward the cavernous blackness of the chimney.  "I’ve come
to ask you not to go at all."

His tone was calm and self-controlled.  It contained no suggestion of
ominous meaning; nor did his face.

"I—I don’t understand," she ventured, nervously.

"I want to propose," explained he, in the same deliberate way, "that we
give each other another trial."

There was no mistaking his meaning.  In the sudden reversal from all she
had been expecting and fearing, her thoughts became mere chaos.  Hands
resting upon the keys, she sat silent, rigid—waiting.

He turned his chair, leaned toward her, his elbows on his knees.  "Is
the idea—is it—distasteful to you?" he asked.

Carefully, with her tapering fingers she measured chords without
striking them.  "Not _distasteful_," said she.

"You do not dislike me—now?"

"I never have, except for a few minutes now and then—when you said or
did tyrannical things."  Painfully embarrassed, she was trying to regain
control of herself under cover of arranging the chiffon round the edge
of the bosom of her dress.

"Courtney, I’m a different man from what I was."

"Yes," she assented, without reserve.  "Very different.  But——"

"Don’t, please," he said, before she could begin to explain.  "When
you’ve heard my reasons for asking you to stay, you may think well of
them.  If not, why you at least can refuse more intelligently.  This
afternoon, when Gallatin was down at the laboratory making an ass of
himself, you whirled upon me with some very vivid reminders of what you
had been to him."

"I was insane with rage—not that it wasn’t all true—only—I—it was—"  She
hung her head—"Oh, I’m so ashamed!—so ashamed!" she cried.

"I’m glad you did," interrupted he, heartily.  "You thought to infuriate
me.  And you did, for a moment. Then—I was astonished to find myself
quite calm.  Do you know why?"

"Yes.  Because you care nothing about me."

"Because I care nothing about him.  Because I know you’ve ceased to
think you care about him—care, you never did.  Since I’ve come to my
senses, I’ve been getting acquainted with you.  And I know you do not
and never did and never could love Basil Gallatin.  That is, the woman
you are now—the only one that interests either of us—never did and never
could."

The deep green eyes glanced gratefully toward him. "That’s true."

"It was simply what you and I went through with when we first met—and
became engaged—and got married."

"Yes," said she.  "Much the same.  But—"  Her eyes met his fully.  "It
wouldn’t be honest if I didn’t say too that I do not regret—about him.
I suppose there’s something wrong with me, but somehow I don’t seem able
to regret anything I do—even the things I’m ashamed of—like what I said
this afternoon.  It all seems part of experience.  It seems necessary.
That experience with him—it helped me toward learning to live."

She expected that he would be offended by her frankness. But he was not.
"It helped you toward learning to live," he assented, like one stating
an indisputable truth. "And it helped me.  No, more than that.  It
_taught_ me.... I wish the lesson could have been got in some—some other
way.  Perhaps you do, too."  She nodded, gazing thoughtfully across the
piano into the fire.  "But," he went on, "fate doesn’t let us choose our
way—or, perhaps, there’s no nice, refined way of getting one’s full
growth, any more than there is for a tree.  It’s simply got to stand
outdoors in all weathers, and learn to survive and grow strong, no
matter what comes."

"And the things that seem to hinder, often help most—and those that look
like helps are enemies."

She saw his understanding, appreciative look, though her eyes were
gazing past him; and she liked it.  "We’ve both learned," said he.  "And
we’ve both been put in the way of learning more.  Now why shouldn’t you
and I use our experience to the best advantage?"

"I intend to try," said she.

"Then it’s simply a question of what is the best advantage.  Isn’t it
for us both to stay on here?"

"I don’t think so," was her slow reply.  "Not for either of us."

"But you’ll listen to my reasons?  Really listen, I mean.  You know, you
caught my bad habit of not listening."

"Yes," she said with a forced, uneasy smile.  "I’ll listen."

"Well—first, there’s this place.  You like it, don’t you? You must,
since you made it.  I’ve found that out, too."

"I love it," she answered.  "But—"  She shook her head.

"Now, do try to be patient with me.  You must consider all three of my
reasons together.  That was only number one.  Number two is Winchie."

She searched his face with swift terrified eyes. He smiled a frank and
winning reassurance that instantly convinced her.  "Please put that kind
of thoughts about me out of your mind forever," he urged.  "I’ve learned
my lesson—that the beginning of fear is the end of trust.  The boy’s
yours.  You’ve got the right to him; he’s got the right to you.  Even if
I could do for him, it’d be my duty—  But I didn’t come here this
evening to talk about duty.  That’s a rotten hypocrisy."

"Is this Richard Vaughan?" she cried laughingly.

"The same—minus his grandfather," replied he, eyes and voice echoing her
laugh.  "No more duty for me. When anybody talks about doing his duty,
he’d better be watched.  If he boasts of having done his duty he’d
better be locked up while they find out what mischief he’s been at.  No,
I’m out for honest, selfish inclination only.  That brings me to my
third reason.  I want you to stay.  But—for very selfish sensible
reasons I want you to want to stay. I’ve gotten acquainted with you.  I
need you.  There’s nobody who could take your place."

She smiled at what seemed to her the extravagant kindness of this.

"I mean just that," he went on.  It wasn’t the words he was saying; it
never is a matter of words.  It was the way he said it—the force behind
the words, like the force behind the projectile.  "I need you.  Don’t
you think you could learn to need me?  A man needs a woman.  A woman
needs a man.  We’ve never given each other a fair trial.  Why shouldn’t
we?  Now that you’ve taught me, I don’t want you to abandon me.  And why
should you begin all over again with another man?"

She sat motionless, hardly breathing, it seemed, from the stillness of
her bosom.  He waited long but no answer came.  He went to the big
old-fashioned chimneypiece, stood with his back to the logs; a look of
somberness came into his face.  "Well," he said, "I’ve said my say."
There was silence in the room.  He drew a long breath.  "What do you
think?"

She lifted her head.  With flushed face and reproachful, almost
resentful eyes she cried: "You’ve no right to come at me that way.  You
make it hard for me to do as I wish."

"You wish to go?  Then it’s settled."  He turned his face to the fire,
and she could not see it.  "We’ll not speak of this again."  His voice
seemed natural; but there must have been some subtle quality in it that
set her nerves to vibrating.

"And you," she cried, "are thinking ’How mean and ungrateful she
is—after my generosity to refuse to——’"

"Not so!" he protested sharply, wheeling round. "I’ve not been generous.
When I told you the fault was chiefly mine, I meant it."

"When a man treats a woman as if she were a human being, it’s
generosity, as the world goes," insisted she.  And then the words began
to pour from her as if they had suddenly found an outlet.  "You make me
feel small and mean in refusing.  Oh, I’m grateful for the way you’ve
treated me—but I hate myself for being grateful—and I’m ashamed that it
is hateful.  But I can’t be different. Your generosity—your forgiveness
hurt my pride.  They make me feel I’m your inferior—and I am.  But I
mustn’t stay where I’d feel humble.  You make me ashamed to go, but I
know I’ve the right to go—and that I ought to go. I must!"

"Then—you are going," was his unhesitating reply. "I don’t want you to
stay.  I see you don’t believe me—don’t understand me—and no wonder.
It’d be useless to try again, unless we were both determined with all
our hearts to make a success if success was at all possible."

"And it couldn’t be a success," said she, a touching melancholy in her
voice, in her deep, mysterious eyes. "For, a man doesn’t want an equal
woman but a dependent—wants his woman to be like his dog.  Oh, what a
world it is!—where everybody cants about self-respect, and everybody
prefers cringers to friends, fear to love!"

"Not I," said Vaughan, in the quiet forceful manner that fitted so well
his air of reserve power, of strength without strenuosity.  "And that’s
why I want you.  Courtney, don’t you see that you’re free and
independent here, now? Don’t you see it’d be a waste of time, a waste of
energy, for you to go away?  You may not need me, but I need you—in
every way.  You can get along without me.  But how can I get along
without you?  Where would I find a woman who could take your place?"

Her bosom was rising and falling stormily.  Her eyes wandered, as if she
were desperately seeking a way of escape and had scant hope of finding
it.

"Can’t you give ’us’ another trial?" he asked, with proud humility.

"I cannot," she cried, starting up in her agitation.  "I cannot!  I must
go.  There’s everything here but the one thing I must have—what you
never could give me, after all that’s happened—and then, there’s what I
said to you this afternoon.  We never could look at each other without
my feeling that you—  Oh, let’s not talk about it.  I must go—I must!  I
cannot live without love—equal love.  I must seek until I find it—find
some one who needs me—all of me—all I have to give—and must give."

He left the hearth and faced her with the length of the piano between
them.  "Could you love me?" he asked.

His voice set to vibrating nerves she had thought would never again
respond to him.  She trembled, and her eyes sank.  "Even if I could—you
couldn’t love me.  You could forgive—could be generous and kind.  But
you couldn’t love."

"But I do love you," he said.  And she, looking at him in wonder,
thought there had never shone eyes so near to being the very soul
itself.  "I began to love you when you sent Gallatin away and faced me
alone and did not lie.  I came back because—  You were like the air to
me, Courtney. One isn’t conscious of the air unless he hasn’t it, and
can’t breathe.  I’ve loved you more and more, day by day, ever since.
And I shall love you more and more—need you more and more—every day
until I die.  Courtney—can’t you forgive me?  I am sorry for what I
did—and—I love you."

She sank upon the piano seat, flung her slim white arms along the
keyboard, buried her face in them.  "I’ve found it!" she sobbed.  "I’ve
found it!"

Several discoveries in chemistry give Richard Vaughan fame, and Courtney
shares it.  But they value it all at nothing beside the discovery which
gives them happiness: That the wise make of their mistakes a ladder, the
foolish a grave.



                                THE END




           *      *      *      *      *      *      *      *




                            *OTHER BOOKS BY*

                        *DAVID GRAHAM PHILLIPS*


Mr. Phillips does not follow the usual fashion in novels.  He has a
fashion of his own.  His readers are now numbered by the scores of
thousands.  In at least one of our cities, at the public library where
they take ten copies of each of Mr. Phillips’s new books, there is
usually a waiting-list _five to seven months_ long for a chance at it,
which shows one of two things, or perhaps both: to how much trouble some
people will go to save the trifling expenditure of the price of a book,
or how extremely popular Mr. Phillips is—so popular that he has a
multitude of eager readers among those who cannot afford to buy books.

It is no small triumph to win all kinds of readers, as Mr. Phillips has.
The reason he has achieved it is because he writes about life as we live
it ourselves, in our hearts and in our homes and in our dealings with
each other—the familiar yet startling and always fascinating truth about
life.

Mr. Phillips is an Indiana man in the early forties. He graduated from
De Pauw University and then from Princeton.  He has had a career giving
him unusual opportunities to observe the life of all kinds of people,
high and low, rich and poor, town and country, here and abroad.  As he
watched the struggle of humanity to live—the concealment and subterfuge,
the extraordinary mixture of good and bad in everyone—all the conflict
in the jungle which we call life impressed itself on him, and he
gradually found that fiction—the novel—was presenting to him the best
medium for him to express to everyone what he had found in his work so
far.  The result has been that in the last few years Mr. Phillips has
gathered together an audience of thousands, who watch each book as it
appears.  It is interesting to see what he has produced.



        Mr. Phillips’s novel just preceding the present work is

                    *The Fashionable Adventures of*

                             *JOSHUA CRAIG*


Concerning this story, the London _Times_ said: "Until the modern Balzac
actually arrives, perhaps Mr. David Graham Phillips may be permitted to
fill the gap"; and of the hero it said: "Joshua Craig, a Lincoln adapted
for the use of latter-day Americans."

It is the story of a strong, virile personality set among the frothy
superficialities of society life in Washington.  Joshua Craig, a young
Western lawyer, is striving to make a name for himself in national
politics, and carries everything before him by his cyclonic
forcefulness.  In spite of his bourgeois birth, he tears down the
barriers of society, and his utter disregard of conventionalities makes
him the sensation of the season.  And yet, for all his frank contempt of
the methods of Aristocracy, their plots and littleness, he finds among
them one "woman," Margaret Severance.  He lays siege to her with all his
impulsiveness and the assurance of success, and makes her own honest
self do battle with the scheming smallnesses of her aristocratic
bringing up. He carries her away with a masterfulness that is
characteristic of him, and marries her before she can get her breath.
Big and rough and crude, repelling and yet compelling, he fights for the
supremacy of his fundamental ideas, and step by step the "lady" in her
gives way to the "woman," always struggling, always battling. She
finally yields to his will—to become the quiescent wife of a candidate
for governor.



            Just preceding this book, Mr. Phillips published

                          *OLD WIVES FOR NEW*


Many, many critics have called this novel immoral and gross.  It is not
so.  It tells the naked truth—not brutally, but frankly.  It is not
romance.  It is real life.  It deals with a wife who cannot keep pace
with her husband, and who becomes slothful and unclean and low-minded
because she does not realize that to live and move forward she must keep
herself physically and mentally clean and fresh.  It is the truth.  It
hits many a woman to-day hard.  Women do not like this truth.  It bites
too deep and so they called it disgusting and immoral. And yet more than
200,000 people have read it.  Of this novel it is said: "If the husband
reads it he gives it to his wife.  If the wife reads it first, she is
very likely to hide it from her husband."  A woman said of it: "While I
was reading it, I stopped one night just after the train wreck.  It was
so vivid that as I took up my morning paper, the next day, I glanced at
the head-lines for news of Murdock’s condition, and to find whether the
scandal had come out."  "Old Wives for New" is a picture of married
life—when the blinds are drawn and the servants out of the way, and the
husband and wife become their real selves.  The _St. Paul Pioneer Press_
says: "It contains things about women that have never seen the light of
day before."  It might have added: and things about men also.  The book
teems with good characters, each with a haunting resemblance to
ourselves. There are women of respectability and women of the other
world, wise men and fools, people that are more good than bad, people
that are more bad than good, but nobody that is unhuman enough to be
either all good or all bad.  The keynote is that of a good story which
searches for the truth.



                  Another of the remarkable novels is

                        *THE SECOND GENERATION*



It has been called a problem novel.  But it is so only in the sense that
every story that lives and breathes and is clothed in flesh and blood
presents a problem.  You will read this book without laying it down, if
you can. And afterward you will think about it for many a day. You will
laugh; you will come very near to crying, if you don’t quite cry.  You
will love old Hiram Ranger and Ellen, his wife.  You will envy Dory
Hargrave his fascinating Adelaide.  You will laugh over the soulful
Janet, and will sympathize with Arthur Ranger.  And as for
Madelene—well, you will certainly find her thrilling!  And the
adventures of all these people will keep you intensely interested.
Doctor Schulze must not go without a mention.  He is as amusing here as
when he appears again in "Old Wives for New," and his advice on medicine
and other things may save you some bad health and a deal of money.  As
its title suggests, the story is a picture of our American life that may
be found in any city or any town the country over—the story of the
strong, hard-working father, who carved his way through life; and then
the story of the next generation—the son and daughter who had apparently
no fight to make.



                          The fourth novel is

                        *LIGHT-FINGERED GENTRY*


Here is another novel of present-day life, and at present as true, as
interesting, from the romantic point of view, as either of the other
two.  When it was appearing serially, one of the foremost men in America
became so excitedly interested that he asked, and as a special favor
got, an advance set of the proofs of the whole story.  He couldn’t wait
to find out what was going to happen about Neva Carlin and her divorced
husband, Horace Armstrong; about the handsome, rakish great artist,
Boris; about sensible Narcisse, the architect, and her nice weak
brother; and the pert, pretty heiress, Amy Fosdick.  As in Mr.
Phillips’s other novels, here we have again those startling, intimate
views of men and women. Much more interesting, much more amusing is this
sort of thing than the slush you so often take into your system with a
box of chocolates, to the detriment of your brain as well as of your
stomach.  It may be said right here that if you are weak or without
ambition, or if you have no desire to be a clean, clean-cut, up-to-date,
attractive human being, "in the know," you had better not read Mr.
Phillips’s novels.  His pictures of people are too true to make people
of the running-to-seed sort comfortable.  The story gives again a true,
unvarnished picture of the situation as it has and does exist among the
great and unprincipled financiers of this country.  It tells in
straightforward, direct language of the sacrifice of friendships and
family ties for the advancement of moneyed interest and the pursuit of
power, while all through the story runs the influence of a woman toward
human and sane living and thinking.



            A year ago Mr. Phillips published a play called

                         *THE WORTH OF A WOMAN*


This little volume illustrates the possibility of making an actual
acting play that is also interesting to read. It is a remarkable love
story—very "daring," as the critics say when they are afraid to say
"literally true."  If you read this play, you will go about posing its
central idea—the dilemma of Diana and her lover—to all your friends, and
arguing over whether Diana or Julian was right—or both, or neither.




                   THE WORKS OF DAVID GRAHAM PHILLIPS


The Hungry Heart
The Fashionable Adventures of Joshua Craig
Old Wives for New
Light-fingered Gentry
The Second Generation
The Worth of a Woman
The Deluge
The Social Secretary
The Plum Tree
The Cost
The Master Rogue
Golden Fleece
A Woman Ventures
The Great God Success






*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HUNGRY HEART ***




A Word from Project Gutenberg


We will update this book if we find any errors.

This book can be found under: http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/48699

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so
the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright royalties.
Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this
license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic
works to protect the Project Gutenberg™ concept and trademark. Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge
for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission. If you do not
charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the rules is
very easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as
creation of derivative works, reports, performances and research.  They
may be modified and printed and given away – you may do practically
_anything_ in the United States with eBooks not protected by U.S.
copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark license,
especially commercial redistribution.



The Full Project Gutenberg License


_Please read this before you distribute or use this work._

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1. General Terms of Use & Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works


*1.A.* By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the
terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all
copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession. If you
paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg™
electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this
agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you
paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

*1.B.* “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things
that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works even
without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph
1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg™
electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement and help
preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. See
paragraph 1.E below.

*1.C.* The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in
the collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an
individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the United States and
you are located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent
you from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating
derivative works based on the work as long as all references to Project
Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the
Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting free access to electronic works
by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms
of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated
with the work. You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg™ License when you share it without charge with others.


*1.D.* The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg™ work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning the
copyright status of any work in any country outside the United States.

*1.E.* Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

*1.E.1.* The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work on
which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase
“Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed,
viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United
    States and most other parts of the world at no cost and with
    almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away
    or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License
    included with this eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org .
    If you are not located in the United States, you’ll have to
    check the laws of the country where you are located before using
    this ebook.

*1.E.2.* If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived
from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not contain a
notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the copyright
holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in the United
States without paying any fees or charges. If you are redistributing or
providing access to a work with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”
associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply either with
the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or obtain permission
for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™ trademark as set
forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

*1.E.3.* If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

*1.E.4.* Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

*1.E.5.* Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

*1.E.6.* You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ web site
(http://www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or
expense to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a
means of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include
the full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

*1.E.7.* Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works unless
you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

*1.E.8.* You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided
that

  - You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
    the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you
    already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to
    the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to
    donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg
    Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60
    days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally
    required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments
    should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg
    Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4,
    “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
    Archive Foundation.”

  - You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
    you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
    does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License.
    You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the
    works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and
    all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works.

  - You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
    any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
    electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
    receipt of the work.

  - You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
    distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.


*1.E.9.* If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set forth
in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from both the
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The Project Gutenberg
Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact
the Foundation as set forth in Section 3. below.

*1.F.*

*1.F.1.* Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by your
equipment.

*1.F.2.* LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES – Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability
to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE
THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF
WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.
YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR
UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT,
INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE
NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

*1.F.3.* LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND – If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund. If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

*1.F.4.* Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS,’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

*1.F.5.* Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

*1.F.6.* INDEMNITY – You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg™
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™


Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s goals
and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain freely
available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure and
permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future generations. To learn
more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how
your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the
Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org .


Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state
of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue
Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is
64-6221541. Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf . Contributions to the
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the
full extent permitted by U.S.  federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its volunteers
and employees are scattered throughout numerous locations. Its business
office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116,
(801) 596-1887, email business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s web site and
official page at http://www.pglaf.org

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation


Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without wide spread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the
number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely
distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest array of
equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to
$5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with
the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where
we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside
the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways
including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate,
please visit: http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic
works.


Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg™
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook’s eBook
number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected _editions_ of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number. The replaced older file is renamed.
_Versions_ based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

    http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg™, including
how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to
our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

Project Gutenberg's On Cambrian and Cumbrian Hills, by Henry Stephens Salt

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.



Title: On Cambrian and Cumbrian Hills
       Pilgrimages to Snowdon and Scafell

Author: Henry Stephens Salt

Release Date: April 13, 2015 [EBook #48700]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ON CAMBRIAN AND CUMBRIAN HILLS ***




Produced by Jan-Fabian Humann and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)









                            ON CAMBRIAN AND
                            CUMBRIAN HILLS

                  _First Edition_              _1908_
                  _Revised Edition, July_      _1922_

     [Illustration: _Frontispiece_]    [_G. P. Abraham, Keswick._

                           THE GREAT GABLE.]

                            ON CAMBRIAN AND
                            CUMBRIAN HILLS

                        PILGRIMAGES TO SNOWDON
                              AND SCAFELL

                                  By

                             HENRY S. SALT

                           (REVISED EDITION)

                      LONDON: C. W. DANIEL, LTD.
                   GRAHAM HOUSE, TUDOR STREET, E.C.4




To C. L. S.


    _I send thee, love, this upland flower I found,
    While wandering lonely with o’erclouded heart,
    Hid in a grey recess of rocky ground
    Among the misty mountains far apart;
    And there I heard the wild wind’s luring sound,
    Which whoso trusts, is healed of earthborn care,
    And watched the lofty ridges loom around,
    Yet yearned in vain their secret faith to share.
    When lo! the sudden sunlight, sparkling keen,
    Poured full upon the vales the glorious day,
    And bared the abiding mountain-tops serene,
    And swept the shifting vapour-wreaths away:--
    Then with the hills’ true heart my heart beat true,
    Heavens opened, cloud-thoughts vanished, and I knew._

    1879.




Preface to First Edition


Books about British mountains are mostly of two kinds, the
popular, written for the tourist, and the technical, written by
the rock-climber. The author of this little study of the hills of
Carnarvonshire and Cumberland is aware that it cannot claim acceptance
under either of those heads, lacking as it does both the usefulness of
the general “guide,” and the thrill of the cragsman’s adventure: he
publishes it, nevertheless, as at least a true expression of the love
which our mountains can inspire, and he will be content if it meets,
here and there, with some friendly “pilgrims” whose sympathies are akin
to his own.

Nor is he without hope that his plea for the preservation of Snowdon
and other mountain “sanctuaries,” before they are utterly disfigured,
may give a much-needed warning while yet there is time.



Contents


                                    PAGE

      I PILGRIMS OF THE MOUNTAIN      11

     II AT THE SHRINE OF SNOWDON      30

    III AT THE SHRINE OF SCAFELL      49

     IV PLEASURES OF THE HEIGHTS      67

      V WILD LIFE                     82

     VI THE BARREN HILLSIDE          100

    VII SLAG-HEAP OR SANCTUARY?      111




ON CAMBRIAN AND CUMBRIAN HILLS




I

Pilgrims of the Mountain


The pilgrimages of which I write are not made in Switzerland; my theme
is a homelier and more humble one. Yet it is a mistake to think that to
see great or at least real mountains it is necessary to go abroad; for
the effect of highland scenery is not a matter of mere height, but is
due far more to shapeliness than to size. There is no lack of British
Alps within our reach, if we know how to regard them; as, for instance,
the gloomily impressive Coolins of Skye, the granite peaks of Arran,
or, to come at once to the subject of this book, the mountains of
Carnarvonshire and Cumberland.

For small and simple as are these Cambrian and Cumbrian hills of ours,
when compared with the exceeding grandeur and vast complexities of
the Swiss Alps or the Pyrenees, they are nevertheless gifted with
the essential features of true mountains--with ridge and precipice,
cloud and mist, wind and storm, tarn and torrent; nor are snow and ice
wanting to complete the picture in winter-time. Why, then, with this
native wealth within our shores, must we all be carried oversea to
climb Alps with guides, when without guides, and at far less cost of
time and money, we may have the same mountain visions, and hear the
same mountain voices at home? A few of us, at least, will refuse to bow
the knee in this fetish-worship of “going abroad”; for the benefit of
going abroad depends mainly on person, temper, and circumstance; and to
some mountain lovers a lifelong intimacy with their own hills is more
fruitful than any foreign excursions can be.

For my part, I like to do my distant mountaineering by means of books.
If I wish, for example, to see the Sierra Nevada of the West, can I
not do so in Muir’s _Mountains of California_, a book scarcely less
real and life-giving than the heights by which it is inspired--far more
so than any superficial visit in the weary rôle of tourist? And then,
if the mood takes me, I know where to find and enjoy a Sierra Nevada
of our own; for is not Snowdon, is not Scafell, too, a Sierra Nevada
during half the months of the year?

My pilgrims, then, are pilgrims to the less lofty, but not less worthy
shrines of Lakeland and Wales; and nowhere do we see more clearly
than in these districts the startling change that has come over the
relations between Mountain and Man. When Gilpin visited Derwentwater in
1786, he quoted with approval the remark of an “ingenious person” who,
on seeing the lake, cried out, “Here is Beauty indeed, Beauty lying in
the lap of Horrour!” and in like spirit Thomas Pennant, in his _Tours
in North Wales_, described the shore of Llyn Idwal as “a fit place to
inspire murderous thoughts, environed with horrible precipices.” Then
gradually the sense of beauty displaced the sense of “horrour,” and
awe was melted into admiration; though still, to a quite recent time,
we see reflected in the literature of our British mountains the belief
that to ascend them was a perilous feat not to be lightly undertaken.
Thus we read of a traveller who, having inquired of his host at
Pen-y-Gwryd whether he might venture to ascend Snowdon without a guide,
was dissuaded from such a headstrong attempt, which “would necessarily
be attended with great risk”[1]; and another writer, in narrating his
ascent by the easy Beddgelert ridge, some fifty years ago, exclaims
with solemnity, “You _felt_ that a false step would be fatal.”

But there were some pioneers, long before climbing became a fine
art, who knew and loved the mountains too well to fear them. Take,
for instance, the story--one of the most interesting in these early
records--of the unknown clergyman who, about the middle of the last
century, used to haunt the Welsh hills, and was “possessed with a most
extraordinary mania for climbing.” It is delightful to read of the
enthusiasm with which he engaged in his pursuit.

    His object was, to use his own expression, “to follow the
    sky-line” of every mountain he visited. For example, he would
    ascend Snowdon from Llanberis, but instead of following the
    beaten track he would take the edge of the mountain along the
    verge of the highest precipices, following what he called the
    “sky-line,” until he reached the summit; he would then descend
    the other side of the mountain toward Beddgelert, in a similar
    manner. He appeared to have no other object in climbing to the
    wild mountain-tops, than merely, as he said, to behold the
    wonderful works of the Almighty. In following the “sky-line,”
    no rocks, however rough, no precipices, unless perfectly
    inaccessible, ever daunted him. This singular mania, or hobby
    horse, he appears to have followed up for years, and continued
    with unabated ardour.[2]

That enthusiast, I am sure, was a true pilgrim, and it is to be
regretted that his name is unrecorded.

People sometimes write as if these mountains were “discovered,” and
first ascended, by English travellers, and as if the native dalesmen
had known nothing of their own country before. Such statements can
hardly be taken with seriousness, for it is evident that, as sheep
were pastured on these hills from the earliest times, the shepherd must
have long preceded the tourist as mountaineer. Thus we find Pennant, in
his description of the “stupendous” ridges that surround Nant Ffrancon,
remarking: “I have, from the depth beneath, seen the shepherds skipping
from peak to peak; but the point of contact was so small that from this
distance they seemed to my uplifted eyes like beings of another order,
floating in the air.” To the shepherds, of course, mountain climbing
was not a sport but a business, and it would not have occurred to them
to climb higher than was necessary; but who can doubt that, in the
course of their daily rounds, the summits as well as the sides of the
hills must have become known to them?

And if the tourist thinks the native cold and unimpressionable, what
does the man who has been born and bred on the hills think of the man
who comes on purpose to scramble there? It is difficult to say, so
friendly yet inscrutable is his attitude; but I remember hearing from a
shepherd in Wastdale, who had tended sheep on the Gable till every crag
was familiar to him, a story which seemed to throw some light on his
sentiments. He had been asked by a rock-climbing visitor, in the dearth
of companions at the hotel, to join him in the ascent of a ridge where
it would have been rash for one to go alone, and he did so; but, as he
said to me, though he was always ready to go on the rocks to rescue
a sheep, it did a bit puzzle him that the gentleman should wish to go
there “for no reason.” That, I suspect, is the underlying problem in
the mind of the hillsman with respect to the amateur; but, of course,
both interest and politeness prevent the free expression of it.[3]

There are cases, however, where the mountain dwellers become themselves
inspired with the love of climbing for climbing’s sake. I was told
of an inhabitant of Snowdonia who had been away in a lowland county
for several years, and when at last he returned, and saw his beloved
hill-tops again, could not satisfy his feelings until he had traversed,
in one walk, the whole circuit of Snowdon, the Glyders, and the
Carnedds, a distance of some thirty miles. Even when there is no such
visible enthusiasm, we may feel assured that the mountains wield a real
though subconscious influence upon their children.

It was not till the early ’eighties that the Alpinists discovered
that there are fine gymnastic “problems” among the rocks of Wales and
Cumberland, and the word went forth that every buttress and gully,
every pinnacle and arête, were to be mastered; from which time onward
the cry of the ambitious climber has been (like the cry of the
religious devotee) _scando quia impossibile est_, with the result that
the “impossible” has mostly become the accomplished. So that whereas,
some twenty-five years ago, an ascent of the more precipitous ridges
and rock-faces was a rare achievement, we now see the very hotel walls
covered with pictures of “pillars” and “needles,” with adventurous
cragsmen perched in alarming postures on the verge, and the frivolities
of visitors’-books interspersed with the grim seriousness of the
climbers’ records, telling in technical language how Messrs. So and So,
“led” by Mr. Dash, surmounted some particular “pitch” (ominous term!)
in Mr. Blank’s gully--for every gully must now be named after its
conqueror.[4]

Let me not be misunderstood as wishing to depreciate in any way the
craft of the climber, which, even apart from its great scientific and
geographical value in the pioneering of Alps, Andes or Himalayas,
and regarded merely as an athletic exercise, is one of the finest of
sports; for which reason those who have long been familiar with the
mountain life, though themselves not rock-climbers, will be the first
to admire, and to envy, the marvellous skill which has carried men
into places where, a quarter-century back, no one dreamed of venturing.
But I would point out that there is another and still more important
function of great mountains--the culture not of the athletic faculty
alone, but of that intellectual sympathy with untamed and primitive
Nature which our civilization threatens to destroy. A mountain is
something more than a thing to climb. To the many who, on a fine summer
day, swarm up Skiddaw or Snowdon by the well-worn pony-paths, it is
pure holiday-making: to the few who (in another sense) swarm up Scafell
Pinnacle or the Napes Needle, it is pure gymnastics; but between or
beyond these two classes there are those--pilgrims I call them--who
find in mountain climbing what only mountains can give, the contact
with unsophisticated Nature, the opportunity to be alone, to be out of
and above the world of ordinary life, to pass from the familiar sights
and surroundings into a cloud-land of new shapes and sounds, where one
feels the fascination of that undiscoverable secret (I do not know how
else to name it) by which every true nature-lover is allured.

Now, judging from the current literature of mountain climbing, one
might suppose that mountains had no such secret at all--that they were
mere fortuitous masses of rock-structure, formidable indeed to those
unskilled in the cragsman’s pastime, but supplying a ready playground
for the expert. In the popular and less ambitious class of guide-book,
written for the “tripper” who is deemed incapable of attaining an easy
summit without instruction, and who is warned of the foolhardiness of
deviating a yard from the appointed track, we do not of course look for
any real appreciation of mountain character; but it is to be regretted
that the same defect is scarcely less observable in the records of the
new school of British rock-climbers, if we except the writings of its
men of genius, such as the late Mr. Owen Glynne Jones, and a few others
who might be mentioned. There are many fine cragsmen, it would seem, to
whom the fells are little more than a gymnasium, and who cannot see the
mountains for the rocks.

A story told me by an artist who is a true lover of the mountains will
illustrate what I mean. Returning to Wastdale Head one evening along
the side of the lake in company with some climbers, while the seamed
front of the Screes across the water was glorified by the setting sun,
he pointed out to one of the party the splendour of the sight. “Yes,”
replied the gymnast, with a glance at the gullies, “you get a good look
at number one and number two, don’t you?” To _him_ the illuminated
mountain-side was just a line of numbered chimneys to scramble in; he
had as much feeling for them as for the numbered bathing-machines on a
seashore.

Still less is there any real understanding of the mountains among the
bulk of the tourists who rush through the districts and throng the
hotels in the “season”: of the motorists, of course, I need not speak.
They will ask, no doubt, the usual well-worn questions--“Which is
Snowdon?” and “Where is Helvellyn?” and “Is that the top of Scafell?”
but you quickly perceive that they are but jesting Pilates who do not
wait for the answer; they may take coach-trips over the passes, and
admire a show waterfall or two, but they see no more in the mountains
than the panorama of the moment, an incident in the day’s amusements of
less import than their lunch.

Who, then, it may be asked, are the “pilgrims” of whom I speak? They
are the small handful of enthusiasts whose concern with the mountains,
as compared with that of the rock-climbers, is of a less venturesome
but not less personal kind--devotees who have made it their pleasure
to become intimately versed in the mountain lore, and to whom the
numberless moods and phases of the hills are more familiarly known than
to many expert cragsmen. To such solitary nature-lovers what name is
more applicable than that of “pilgrims,” a pilgrim, we are told, being
one “who visits with religious intent, some place reputed to possess
especial holiness”; and have we not the authority of a great poet for
so using it?[5]

It is gratifying to me to be able to claim episcopal sanction for my
own share, such as it is, in these mountain pilgrimages; for it was
by a Bishop,[6] as renowned for his physical prowess as for his piety
and learning, that I was first inducted to this work, and ordained
(so to speak) in the high calling which I have followed, more or less
faithfully, for over fifty years. It so chanced that, as a sixth-form
boy in a great public school, I was sent in the summer holidays to act
as tutor to a nephew of the Bishop, and the scene of our studies was
a village on the Carnarvonshire coast, under the great northern spurs
of Carnedd Llewelyn. With shame I must confess that both pupil and
tutor preferred the allurements of the shore to the austerities of the
heights; but the Bishop, muscular Christian and walker that he was,
proud of traversing the length and breadth of his diocese on foot, was
bent on finding his way--and what more troubled us, _our_ way--to the
little tarn, Llyn an Afon, which lies under the steep front of Y Foel
Fras, itself a mountain of 3,000 feet; and in search of this lakelet
we were “commandeered,” much against our wishes, to march with the
Bishop across the hills. Even now I see him, as he waved his stick
encouragingly to us from some far headland, while we two boys lagged
wearily behind, and wondered at the strange climbing propensities of
bishops; and I remember that when an irreverent groan of “Oh, what
a fool the Bishop is!” escaped from my pupil’s lips, I inexcusably
failed to reprove him. Little did I foresee that, though the task was
so unwelcome to me at the moment, I was soon myself to be bitten with
the same mountain madness, and that the image of Llyn an Afon, nestling
under a semicircle of rocks at the head of its long pastoral valley,
was to draw me back many and many a time, in later years, to revisit
that lonely region. The Bishop himself would be flattered, perhaps,
could he know that, as a result of that walk, one of his two laggards
became a confirmed pilgrim, and has since made more ascents than he
cares to confess of those Carnarvonshire mountains, and at all kinds of
seasons.

For the notion, at one time widespread, and still by no means extinct,
that these districts can be properly visited only in July and August is
wholly erroneous. There is no doubt that in May and June the climate is
usually at its best, and then most often occur those halcyon spells of
sunshine which the drenched August holiday-maker is apt to regard as a
myth; for the tourist waits till the wet weather has set in, and then
has some hard things to say of the mountains’ rudeness. The autumn,
too, is often a goodly season for the climber, when the last torrential
rains of August or September have sent the last disillusioned visitors
to their homes; and even the winter-time, or early spring, as Southey,
with other authorities, has pointed out, is far more fruitful than the
late summer in those “goings on in heaven” which give an ever-shifting
glory to the hills.

Eastertide is now a popular week among the mountains, but fifty years
ago the hotels were practically empty at that season. I well remember
how, as an undergraduate at Cambridge, I planned my first Easter
visit to Cumberland, and was gravely warned by a learned Fellow of my
College, the librarian, Henry Bradshaw, that it would be a very rash
undertaking to go at that time, for “the passes,” he said, “would not
be open.” He had in mind, possibly, a sentence in Gray’s account of
his trip to the Lake District in 1769, where it is stated of the gates
of the Styhead Pass, at Seathwaite, that “all farther access is here
barred to prying mortals, only there is a little path winding over the
fells, and for some weeks in the year passable to the dalesmen; but
the mountains know well that these innocent people will not reveal the
mysteries of their ancient kingdom.” If my monitor could now stand on
the Styhead on a fine Easter Monday, he would see a sight to surprise
him!

Nor is it strange that the mountains should attract their worshippers
at all seasons of the year, for the passion, once acquired, is
insatiable; you may tire of the hills for awhile, but if you have once
felt their power you will assuredly return to them; and that perhaps is
why we think of them as holding some inner secret of their own. Who
that has sympathetically studied them will deny it? There are moments
when, as we stand in the presence of a great mountain group, we are
almost overwhelmingly conscious of the brooding watchfulness, the
sphinx-like reserve and expectancy, with which these silent sentinels
confront us. What is the source of the strong yet mysterious attraction
that draws us again and again to these wildernesses of rock and cloud,
this “builded desolation” which might seem so antagonistic to human
sympathies? Why is it that we find even a humanizing influence in
wastes where our grandfathers could see nothing but what repelled them
as “savage” and “ferocious”? The charm that binds us is as inexplicable
as it is real. If human love is “of the valley” and calls us down,
there is another and wilder love that is of the mountain and calls us
upward.

There are unfrequented ranges, such as the Eskdale side of Scafell,
or the Aber side of Carnedd Llewelyn, where one may walk for twelve
hours together without meeting a human being; indeed, the loneliness
of the Welsh hills is now even greater than it used to be, since the
“hafodtai,” or upland farmsteads, where the herdsmen camped out during
the summer months, have been abandoned; and the present concentration
of both tourists and climbers on certain favoured spots makes the
silence all the deeper elsewhere. Thus it is that the pilgrim who
is neither tyro nor expert, and therefore not dependent on the
companionship of others, on account either of his own incapacity or of
the arduous nature of his task, is able on the mountains to profit by
a rare form of intercourse which, in the hurry and bustle of modern
life, has become increasingly difficult; he can exchange ideas (if
he has any) with _himself_. His surroundings are such as to quicken
and foster such self-converse, not by the morbid introspection of the
solitary--for, rightly regarded, there is no such thing as solitude
among the hills--but by the liberating influence which these scenes
exert both on the body and on the mind.

Nor must it be supposed that there is any taint of moroseness or
misanthropy in this mountain seclusion; the contrary, rather, is the
case, and the human sympathies are perhaps all the stronger because
they are not expressed but implied. Tender relationships need space to
grow in, and the self-withdrawal which allows a fuller, because a freer
view of them, does not lessen but rather fosters their tenderness,
even as we may understand the hills themselves the better if we
sometimes watch them from afar; and it is just this gift of space and
freedom that we find in mountains as nowhere else. Therefore it is
true, in Muir’s words, that “the darkest scriptures of the mountains
are illumined with bright passages of love that never fail to make
themselves felt when one is alone.”

Again, if the mountains can teach us to feel more deeply, they can
also help us more effectively to think. I have heard mountaineering
deprecated by a learned scholar as having too much of the “animal” in
it. The mountains certainly are not a thinking-shop; we do not go to
them to follow a train of thought, or to solve a mathematical problem,
but when we return from them we should be able to think the better, for
in their company we have stood face to face with those great natural
forces which are the best and most elemental educators of heart and
mind alike. As Wordsworth’s “Solitary” said of the “two huge peaks,”
that overlooked his hermitage:

    Thoughts are not busier in the mind of man
    Than the mute agents stirring there.

For, rightly spent, what we call “a day upon the mountains” is in
truth an eight or ten hours’ enfranchisement from a mortal obsession.
Our chains fall from us--the small cramping chains of lifelong
habit--and we go free. We awake out of the deadly torpor of our
everyday “occupations,” and we live. And excellent as is the physical
exaltation of climbing--the toil and triumph of the ascent--there is
also an intellectual and spiritual element in the mountain-passion,
which can lift us out of ourselves, and show us, from a higher plane
of feeling, as no mere book-knowledge can do, the true proportions and
relations of things. One cannot walk in such regions, consciously,
without enlargement of thought. There are heights and valleys which,
to those who seek them in a sympathetic spirit, are better “seats of
learning” than any school or university in the land; there are days
when the climber seems to rise into a rarer mental as well as visual
atmosphere, and to leave far below him the crass cares and prejudices
of commonplace life.[7]

In this sense the humanities of thought do not wither, but rather
are fostered and strengthened, in the loneliness of the hills, and
the hills themselves, when approached in a fit spirit, become a
living inspiration, which enables us the better to know and value our
fellow-beings of flesh and blood. “Would that I could give the world
some clue to apprehend these strange weird companions of my life, in
their higher teachings and ideals. Painters give them up in despair, as
impossible, unrenderable; and they have yet to be described in their
subtle powers of thought-giving and helpful teaching.” So wrote to
me a friend who had dwelt for many years under the shadow of a mighty
mountain range.[8]

Here, then, is the function of mountains in relation to human life.
To every one there is opened (if he knows it) his own doorway for
stepping out into space--for detaching himself for a time from the
heavy environment of customary thought. To many it is music that
furnishes this passport; to others poetry; to some few the philosophic
reverie, or deliberate practice of the _yoga_. I have ventured to speak
of mountain climbing in a similar relation, and to suggest that, in
certain aspects, it is indeed a form of _ecstasy_, a standing above,
and out of, oneself. The mind, no less than the body, has its Snowdons
and its Helvellyns--its Crib Gochs and its Striding Edges--and when we
climb them we may rise superior, not only to the visible landscape but
to ourselves, and survey from a new vantage-point the low-lying flats
and pastures, or shall we say the tablelands (too often literally so),
of our own tastes and habits. How many astronomers are busily intent on
surveying the Mountains of the Moon! And shall we not devote at least
equal attention to these Mountains of the Mind, which are far nearer,
clearer, and more real to us? Their secret, maybe, we shall never fully
read; it is at least our privilege to have guessed at it.

Thus it is that these our British highlands are sacred ground to some
of us. We have gone on pilgrimage to them again and again, until the
association has become, in a manner, a personal one; for there are
instinctive sympathies with places as with people, and to many, as
to myself, the connexion with certain mountains has been a deep and
lasting influence. How many days, amounting to months and years of my
life, have I spent in their company; and how often have I been keenly
conscious of their presence, even when living far away from them in the
din and dust of towns! Going back to these mountain shrines, after long
and unwilling absence, we find that in heart we have never left them at
all.




II

At the Shrine of Snowdon


It is commonly said that the approach to Snowdon begins at Capel Curig;
but this is a very shortsighted and unimaginative way of regarding
so rich an experience as a pilgrimage to the heart of Wales. To the
true mountain lover, the approach begins at Euston Square. Yes, there,
in the great busy station, when you have uttered the magic word,
“Bettws-y-Coed,” and have received what looks like a mere railway
ticket, but is, in fact, a passport to the enchanted fastnesses of the
hills--from that moment, and all the day, as you glide swiftly through
the broad fields of the Midlands, you see before you (if you are fitted
to be a pilgrim at all) the distant ridges and cloud-capped peaks of
Snowdonia, and hear the music of the streams.

For let it not be supposed that Capel Curig is, as other mountain
hamlets are, a mere halting-place in the “circular tour” of North
Wales. An old writer has called the place “an excellent inn in a
desert,” but it is much more than that; it is an excellent desert
round an inn. It is the special glory of the Capel that it lies, not
in a sunken hollow, but on an open upland, some 700 feet above the sea,
where the air, even at the hottest noontide, breathes crisp and bracing
from the hills. The distance from Bettws-y-Coed is only five or six
miles by road; in climate the difference is one that no mileage can
express. From the low, moist woodlands you mount gradually up till you
reach the point where the Llugwy river winds in a series of rocky falls
round the base of Moel Siabod; then there is a bend, and yet another
bend, in the valley, and you find yourself at St. Curig’s shrine.
Great mountains are all around you, but there is a sense of space and
freedom, with wild slopes of grass and rock stretching up and back to
the higher ridges that lie behind. One is not oppressed, as so often in
mountain districts, by the nearness of the overhanging heights.

By climbing one of the low hills that border the junction of the
streams, you may learn the general features of the place at a glance.
Facing westward, with your back to Bettws-y-Coed, you look into two
bare, bleak, converging valleys, of which the southern is topped by the
clear-cut peaks of Snowdon, the northern by the bulky range of Carnedd
Llewelyn, while between them is the great mass of the Glyders. You are
face to face with the wildest region of North Wales--a foreground of
broad, marshy moorland, where you see little life but an occasional
herd of black cattle, and a background of mountains that rise above
3,000 feet; yet the dreariness of the scene, so striking in its first
impression, is relieved and varied, on fuller acquaintance, by the
unsuspected tenderness that it enfolds. Simple and severe as the
outlines are, there lies beneath them a wealth of loveliness that no
intimacy can exhaust--lakes and mountain streams, unsurpassed for
purity and freshness; secret nooks and lawns, and green terraces of
turf, interspersed with grey crags and buttresses; and, crowning all,
the great circle of mountains which for ever attracts and holds the eye
without laying a burden on the mind.

Capel Curig, as a glance at the map will show, is the ideal centre
for the exploration of Snowdonia, lying as it does at the junction of
the two chief valleys, from which any of the mountain ranges may be
approached; and there is in Capel Curig (for those who know it) the
ideal cottage in which to spend a memorable fortnight among the hills.
A more welcome resting-place, for one who loves a wild country, than
this little home among the mountains, with the plash of streams and the
cry of curlews all around, it would be difficult to imagine; but it is
less as a resting-place than a starting-place that it is here referred
to. Let it be supposed, therefore, that we have once more spent a
night in the cottage, with the moon looking down on us from over the
ridge of Siabod; that we have paid yet another morning visit to our
bathing-place in the Llugwy, with the dipper and the grey wagtail
flying up and down the stream, and that we are now starting out to make
renewed acquaintance with the grim giants couched around.

The sense of severity and aloofness which haunts these mountains as
compared with the Cumberland “fells,” is due chiefly no doubt to their
sterner physical features, and to the greater depth and bleakness of
the bare valleys which intersect them, each group of peaks rising
apart, like a mountain system of its own; but we Saxon visitors are
also moved, perhaps, by a feeling of racial strangeness in a land
which has no interpreter for us--no literary associations such as
those by which the English lakes are endeared--nothing but a dim
record of earlier inhabitants, with wild tales of battles and feuds,
soldiers and banditti, insurrections and invasions, now alike buried
in the past. We seem to be looking on savage mountains in a foreign
land. For me at least the first impression of “angry grandeur” in the
Welsh mountains[9] has never been wholly obliterated by the intimacy
of years, and has lent an unfailing zest to my walks. I can still
recall the youthful eagerness with which, after my first ascent of
Snowdon with a College friend, we set off, then and there, to toil
from Pen-y-Gwryd up the long ridge of Moel Siabod; and how on a later
occasion, after crossing Snowdon to Beddgelert, I was not satisfied
until I had stood on the opposite crest of Moel Hebog in the afternoon.
There must assuredly be some strong attraction about the mountains that
can draw one, even in the fervour of boyhood, to pay them double homage
such as this.

Next to the fact that they fall into the three great groups of
Snowdon, the Glyders and the Carnedds--with Moel Siabod, and the
heathery moorlands that link it to Cynicht and Moelwyn, forming a
boundary on the south-east--the first point that strikes the watcher
of these stimulating heights is that they offer, for the most part,
a precipitous face on their northern or eastern fronts, while to the
south and west they sink less formidably, though often with great
steepness, to their dividing “bwlchs.” This structure is very marked in
the central range of the Glyders,[10] where for four miles around the
head of Nant Ffrancon the great escarpment looks down on the waters of
Llyn Ogwen; on the south there is but a formless steep of intermingled
heather and rock, so that it would be surprising that strangers should
be instructed to ascend the mountain from that quarter, if the art of
climbing--that is, of selecting the routes that yield the greatest
satisfaction to the climber--were not so entirely overlooked.

To understand the Glyders, therefore, it is from Ogwen that we must
start, that beautiful dark lake which lies, a thousand feet above
sea-level, in the great mountain basin from which Nant Ffrancon
descends--

    Where all is rocks at random thrown,
    Black waves, bare crags, and banks of stone.

There is much truth in the remark made sixty years ago by Mr. C. F.
Cliffe that “there are few parts of these isles in which elemental
effects may be seen, or heard, to such advantage as in this enormous
valley, enclosed on nearly three sides; Aeolus sports here to his
heart’s content”; for owing to the sharp northward bend which the glen
takes at the foot of Llyn Ogwen, the play of wind and cloud in this
boisterous amphitheatre is often a wonderful sight. Looking southward
from this point, we have above us the beetling front of the Glyders,
and by striking up the spur known locally as the Gribin, with Llyn
Idwal on its right and Llyn Bochlwyd on its left, we gain a natural
causeway, at first broad and bulky, then narrowing to a knife-edge,
which leads us through the heart of the mountain, with intoxicating
sights on either side, to the high plateau between the Glyder Fawr and
the Glyder Fach. Across Cwm Bochlwyd, as we ascend, rises the great
mountain tower of Tryfan, which, since the outrage done to the majesty
of Snowdon, is rivalled only by Crib Goch for the supreme honours of
Welsh summits; on the other hand we see, above Llyn Idwal, the famous
black rift in the mural precipice, known as the Devil’s Kitchen, with
its cataract of disgorged boulders streaking the slope below. Having
reached the top of the Gribin, we pass at a step from our narrow
staircase into an upper storey between the two summits of the Glyders,
described in early guide-books as “the chilly mountainous flat”; nor
to this day is there a spot that more often merits the name, though
there are times, too, when it may serve rather as a basking-place in
summer heat. From this pivot we have the whole mountain, with its wide
prospects, at our command, and can either turn to the right toward the
Glyder Fawr, and thence follow the sky-line over Y Garn to the Great
Elidyr, the western buttress of the range, or walk leftward (which is
by far the better course) to the Glyder Fach, from which we can cross
the gap to Tryfan and descend by its precipitous northern ridge to our
starting-place at Llyn Ogwen.

The character of the Glyder itself is that of a wild stony desert,
upbreaking here and there, as notably at its summit, into bristling
“horns” and “pikes”--stacks and shafts of rock piled together in
fantastic disarray--wonderful in all weathers, but most when the spell
of cloud is upon them. Of many journeys across this mountain, I best
remember those which were fought step by step against the storm, when
the wind was so strong that one had to clutch at the crags to avoid
being blown away, and the mist so thick that even the unforgotten rock
figures--grotesque shapes of beasts and fowls and reptiles without
name--were blurred and transformed, so that in the compass alone was
there certainty;[11] but the fair days also are not less treasured in
the mind when one could sit and watch the Ogwen stream, like the river
in Mrs. Browning’s poem, “flowing ever in a shadow greenly onward
to the sea,” or southward the glitter of Portmadoc Bay, hung like a
picture in the sky, or far to the south-east the Berwyn Hills, and
other distant and more distant ranges, covered with snow (I recall the
wonders of one long-past winter afternoon) and gleaming like fire in
the sunset.

But it is to Tryfan, even more than to the Glyder Fach, that the
heart of the pilgrim is drawn--that huge rocky bastion which juts
out from the battlements of the main ridge, and has been the marvel
of generations of travellers on the coach-road which it overhangs.
Well might Pennant, looking across to it from the verge of the Glyder
a hundred years before rock-climbing was thought of, feel dismayed
at its frown! “In the midst of a vale far below,” he wrote, “rises
the singular mountain Trevaen, assuming on this side a pyramidal
form, naked and very rugged. A precipice, from the summit of which I
surveyed the strange scene, forbade my approach to examine the nature
of its composition.” There is no difficulty in approaching Tryfan from
this side, indeed the very precipice of which Pennant spoke is now
recommended by rock-climbers as a good training-place for beginners;
but so formidable is the look of the mountain that until about forty
years ago it was ascended by only one route, nor even now, when it has
lost its former terrors, has it lost one jot of its impressiveness.
After visiting Tryfan some scores of times, I still feel its attraction
as strongly as when I first discovered it (for it comes to every
mountain-lover as a discovery of his own), and I have sometimes thought
that a summer might be well spent in making a thorough study of the
peak, until one became familiar with the many unexplored recesses which
the climber passes by, that labyrinth of cyclopean masonry--terraces
and galleries, slabs and spires, turrets and gargoyles--with which
it uprears itself, like the great cathedral that it is, to the two
standing stones which form its crest.

No hermitage certainly could be more sublime, for him who would dwell
above the pomps and vanities of the world, than a nook in one of the
rocky pent-houses or caverns that yawn along the sides of Tryfan; and
such anchorite would at least enjoy the best natural observatory, and
the finest mountain berries, that Carnarvonshire can produce. Plain
living and high thinking might there be practised _in excelsis_.

When we turn from the Glyders and Tryfan, still in their primitive
state of utter wildness, to their great neighbour, Snowdon, scarred
and maimed by copper-mine and steam-engine, the change is a striking
one; it is like passing from a perfectly preserved work of art to
some broken monument, the torso of a giant form, in which we have
to reconstruct from the beauty of what remains, the once exceeding
splendour of the whole. Capel Curig, as I have said, is the point from
which “Snowdon and all his sons” (to use Pennant’s quaint expression)
are best seen; to ascend from Llanberis and Beddgelert is to go up by
a back staircase in neglect of the front one, a mistaken course at
any time, and doubly so now that the summit has been spoiled, and the
interest of the mountain in great part shifted to its attendant peaks,
which rise on the Capel Curig side.

But crippled as Snowdon is, we may still find on it one incomparable
excursion, the circuit of the great hollow of Cwm Dyli by the ridges
of Lliwedd and Crib Goch, which, if we can shut our eyes to the
abominations of slag-heap and railroad that must be passed on the way,
will hold its own, even against the Glyder and Tryfan, as the grandest
mountain walk in Wales. Lliwedd itself, which rises so finely from the
shores of Llyn Llydaw, is a beautiful object from every side but the
south, and may be described as a sort of glorified Skiddaw--as if the
Cumbrian hill, while losing none of the graceful lines and curves that
distinguish it, had been cut down, on its front, from a mere steep
of shale and heather into a mighty precipice. Along the edge of this
rock-face, the haunt once of the wild goat, now of the cragsman, and
over the twin peaks, with their bird’s-eye views of Cwm Dyli and its
two lakes on one side, and the lakeless Cwm Llan on the other, we have
an ideal route to Snowdon.

Arrived _there_, what a scene awaits us, especially if the train has
just steamed in with its latest freight of trippers! For consider on
what ground it is that we stand--the very summit of the sacred hill,
the shrine of Snowdon, once the pride and stronghold of the Cymry. Thus
wrote the historian Camden, more than three centuries ago:

    We may very properly call these mountains the British Alps, for
    besides that they are the highest in all the island, they are
    also no less inaccessible by reason of the steepness of their
    rocks than the Alps themselves; and they all encompass one hill
    which, far exceeding the rest in height, does so tower its head
    aloft that it seems not merely to threaten the sky, but to
    thrust its summit into it. It harbours snow continually, being
    throughout the year covered with it, or rather with an aged
    crust of snow; hence the British name of ‘Craig Eryri,’ and
    the English “Snowdon.”

We smile at the hyperbole of these ancient writers, but even now, in
these days of its utmost wrong, the natural sovereignty of Snowdon
stands confessed; so truly imperial is its form, and so symmetrically
do its superb ridges radiate from the parent peak. Its everlasting
snow was a fable; but deep drifts may be seen as late as midsummer in
its northern gullies, and in the winter months, when the zigzag tracks
are deeply covered, it is often no easy matter, for any but trained
climbers, to make the ascent from Capel Curig; there are times when the
high cornice of snow, overlapping the brow of the ridge at the head of
Cwm Dyli, offers a formidable barrier.

It was well that so noble a mountain, rich in legend and tradition,
should continue to stir public sympathies[12] and draw pilgrims to
its shrine; the pity is that the shrine itself should have been
despoiled--not, be it noted, by the _number_ of its votaries, which
was great even before the middle of the last century, when the mischief
was still undone, but by the hideous “accommodation” provided for them.
It would not have been difficult, with a little care and forethought,
to build a mountain hut in a sheltered place a few feet below the
top of the ridge, where it would have been practically unseen;
unfortunately what was done, about seventy years ago, was to erect
some unsightly buildings on the very summit, and these have lately
been enlarged into the present Summit Hotel, of which it need only be
said, as was said of the nose of a certain philosopher, that “language
is not vituperatious enough to describe it.” I never see the place
without thinking longingly of the last scene in Poe’s story, _The Fall
of the House of Usher_, where a certain accursed mansion obligingly
topples over and disappears in a neighbouring tarn; might it not be
hoped, then, that on some wild winter night, when these buildings are
untenanted, they would be blown by a south-west hurricane over the
edge of Clogwyn Garnedd into the waters of Glaslyn below? But such
wishes, however pious, are unavailing; to take a cup of tea in the
refreshment-room, in preparation for the advance to Crib Goch, is the
wiser course.

It is pleasant to exchange the crowded mart on Snowdon for the space
and solitude of Carnedd Ugain, its high northern shoulder which
overlooks the Llanberis side; but though solitude will now be ours,
space must soon begin to fail us, as the broad expanse dwindles and
contracts to a mere rocky curtain. A glorious ridge it is that we enter
on, which under the two names of Crib-y-Ddysgl and Crib Goch, but in
reality one and indivisible, runs with hardly a break for a full mile
eastward, with Cwm Dyli on the right, and the still greater depths of
Cwm Glas and the Pass of Llanberis on the left, until, after dipping
to the grassy saddle known as Bwlch Goch, it rises again to the famous
Pinnacles, and then narrows in once again, and more acutely, to the two
summits, at a height of 3,000 feet. Though the whole “Red Ridge” from
end to end is narrow, and a passage along it is apt to bring to mind
the Gendin Edge in _Peer Gynt_--

    Nigh on four miles long it stretches
    Sharp before you like a scythe--

it is to the eastern section of it, between and adjoining the two
cairns, that the main interest belongs, and hither for years past all
lovers of the Welsh hills have aspired. Yet owing doubtless to the fact
that every one who has written of Crib Goch has written of it in the
terms of his own powers as climber, and these powers vary immensely,
it is by no means easy to obtain a clear and trustworthy idea of it
from the published descriptions. The old writers, for the most part,
spoke of it as a place of terror, where it was foolhardy to venture,
and where the least slip would be fatal; in the literature of the new
school of rock-climbing, on the other hand it is treated like Striding
Edge on Helvellyn, or Sharp Edge on Saddleback, as just a pleasant
scramble, and it is said to be a moot point among cragsmen whether
they could pass along it with their hands tied. So differently does a
mountain present itself, according to the capacity and confidence of
the mountaineer!

I have heard the story of an ardent pilgrim, by no means a cragsman,
who had once braced himself, with some misgivings, to the crossing
of Crib Goch, and was just entering on the most awkward bit of the
journey, when he was met by another traveller coming from the opposite
end. Pleased to think that he was about to receive, in his straitened
circumstances, a word of encouragement from a fellow-climber, he
was startled by the stranger breaking out into an almost passionate
reprobation of the perils of mountain edges in general and in
particular of Crib Goch. “I am now a married man,” he cried, “and it is
not right, it is not proper, for me to be here.” My friend felt that
there was a lack of reason in addressing these remonstrances to _him_;
but his own position, astride of a knife-edge, was not favourable
for argument, and he was indeed so taken aback by the inauspicious
character of the meeting that he sorrowfully renounced Crib Goch and
retired the way he came.

In reality, though this “crib” offers no obstacle whatever to an active
person who is quite free from giddiness, it is much narrower and more
precipitous than any of the Cumberland “edges,” and for the ordinary
climber, as distinct from the expert, needs to be taken with more
care. Imagine yourself, reader, perched on the roof, so to speak, of a
mountain--a colossal roof, some fifteen hundred feet above the valleys
below, where for sparrow on housetop you have raven or buzzard--and,
further, imagine the angle of this roof to be a ridge of spiky and
crumbling rock, averaging a foot in width at the top, and dropping
almost sheer on the north side into the hollow of Cwm Glas, while on
the south it falls away in an extremely steep slope, which the timid
would call a precipice, but which offers an abundance of friendly
ledges and notches as foothold. Such is Crib Goch, and along this ridge
you must travel to reach the higher cairn, whether you approach it,
as I have described, in a descent from Snowdon, or more directly by a
stiff climb up its eastern gable from Pen-y-Pas. In any case it has
the distinction, among Snowdonian summits, of being accessible only to
those pilgrims who are prepared to “climb.”

But if the glory of Snowdon lies in its shapely ridges, and of the
Glyders in their wilderness of rocks, it is for the very different
qualities of breadth and bulk that we admire the great mountain
range of which the centre and crown is Carnedd Llewelyn. Look at a
graded map of Carnarvonshire, and you will note that this conspicuous
group, extending from the steep spur of Carnedd Dafydd, above the
shore of Llyn Ogwen, to the sea-washed promontory of Penmaenmawr,
comprises a much greater _extent_ of high ground--say, of over three
thousand feet--than either Snowdon or the Glyders; and, owing to its
larger area, its hidden recesses are wilder, more desolate, and more
primitive, than any other hill-tract in North Wales. Sharp peaks it has
none; but in places, as at the head of Cwm Eigiau or Cwm Llafar, there
are huge crags and precipices, nor are there wanting grand ridges, such
as the rocky isthmus that unites Pen Helig to Carnedd Llewelyn, or the
high saddle between the two Carnedds themselves; but for the most part
what impresses one in these mountains, as compared with those already
described, is the greater spaciousness of their massive heights, and
the greater openness of their outlook, both skyward and seaward.

For those who love such wilds, nothing is better than a long day’s
wandering in the heart of this secluded district, whether the start be
made from the Capel Curig quarter, or from Nant Ffrancon on the west,
or from the Conway Valley on the east, or from the northern seacoast
at Aber; in any case there is need of strong and steady walking to
surmount the marshy slopes, the haunt of plover and curlew, by which
the great Carnedd is encircled, and to place oneself on the high
plateau above. The compass, too, will have to be brought into play, if
there are clouds on the hills, for nowhere are mists more bewildering
than on these vast moorlands, where there are no natural signposts for
our guidance, and where the bare grassy spaces stretch away for miles
without a distinguishing mark. The best of all these walks is that from
Capel Curig to Aber, which takes us by Llyn Llugwy, the source of the
Llugwy River, to Carnedd Llewelyn, and thence across the great flat
tops to Y Foel Fras, and down past the little Llyn-an-Afon through a
narrow glen to the sea.

For myself these strange lonely mountains, perhaps because I knew them
earliest, have always had a peculiar charm; and I have found their
fascination as strong in winter-time as in summer. Great as are the
delights of Llyn Llugwy on a hot June day, I also think of it with
affection as I have known it in December, lashed into fury by the
winds, and its black waters in sharp contrast with the surrounding
snow. What the temper of the wind can be in these uplands on a gusty
winter afternoon, when it lifts up flakes of snow and ice from the
hillside and flings them broadcast in blinding showers, only those will
understand who have plodded to the top of Carnedd Llewelyn or Carnedd
Dafydd at such season.

Enough has now been said, perhaps, to make plain at least the leading
characteristics of Snowdonia, as viewed from our central starting-point
at Capel Curig. But what the pilgrim to these mountains can never make
plain, for he has only half guessed it himself, is the deeper meaning
which they have for him, the higher vision which he has caught from
their stern companionship during his solitary rambles in their midst.




III

At the Shrine of Scafell


If “angry grandeur,” as has been said, is the feature of the
Carnarvonshire mountains, that of the Cumbrian Fells may be described
as friendly grouping. Unlike the proud oligarchies of Snowdon and
the Glyders, we see here a free and equal democracy, a brood of
giant brothers, linked together with rocky arm in arm, and with no
crowned heads claiming marked predominance over their fellows. It is
collectively, rather than singly, that the Lake mountains impress us.
“In magnitude and grandeur,” says Wordsworth, “they are individually
inferior to the most celebrated of those in some other parts of the
island; but in the combinations which they make, towering above each
other, or lifting themselves in ridges like the waves of a tumultuous
sea, they are surpassed by none.”[13]

The sense of greater friendliness and accessibility of which we are
conscious among these hills may be due partly to this cause, still
more, perhaps, to the influence of the Lake writers, who have so
largely created the sentiment with which the fells are begirt; we
feel “at home” there in a degree not known to us either in Wales or
in Scotland. It has to be remembered, too, that the Lake District, in
contrast to Wales, is a land without a past, the cradle of a fortunate
race which has had no troubled record of wars or rumours of wars, but
an almost unruffled exemption from “history”; and this, again, may tend
to strengthen the feeling of serenity associated with these heights,
even in the minds of those who have undergone many buffetings from
their storms.

But this feeling must be a modern one, for the earliest visitors, as we
have seen, were affected rather by the terrors than the charms of the
mountains, so that the very bridle-paths seemed as precipices to them,
and we find one old traveller sagely remarking that “there is something
unmanly in conceiving a difficulty in traversing a path, which, we were
told, the women of the country would ascend on horseback, with their
panniers of eggs and butter.”[14] Of all writers, the best qualified,
by his love of the mystic and sublime, to give expression to the awe
which the fells once inspired, was De Quincey; and in his _Memorials of
Grasmere_ he has drawn a highly coloured, yet in spirit very faithful
picture of a region rather vaguely apprehended by him, where, as he
says, far beyond the “enormous barrier” of his own Easedale, “tower
the aspiring heads, usually enveloped in cloud and mist, of Glaramara,
Bowfell, and the other fells of Langdale Head and Borrowdale.” And here
it may be remarked that though much poetry, of a far-fetched kind, has
been written about mountains, the mountains are still waiting for their
poet, at close quarters. In Wordsworth’s “Excursion” certain aspects
of the fells are wonderfully portrayed, and in Scott’s “Helvellyn,”
and that canto of his “Lord of the Isles” where the Coolin Hills are
the theme, we have true mountain idylls; but on the whole it has to
be confessed that the poets have written about mountains as if they
had never set foot on them, but had been content to take the panoramic
“views” of them from afar. Even Wordsworth’s prose account of his
ascent from Seathwaite “to the top of the ridge, called Ash Course,”
makes one suspect that his real acquaintance with the hills was very
slight; indeed his corruption of the guide’s pronunciation of “Esk
Hause” (the typical name of the central saddle of the Scafell range, at
the head of Eskdale) into the absurdity of “Ash Course,” shows that he
had but little sympathetic knowledge either of the nomenclature of the
hills or of the dialect of the hillsmen.

There is much insight, however, in Wordsworth’s selection of the Sty
Head as the pivot of the Scafell group. “From a point between Great
Gavel and Scafell,” he says, “a shepherd would not require more than
an hour to descend into any one of the principal vales by which he
would be surrounded. Yet, though clustered together, every valley
has its distinct and separate character.” The truth of this will be
owned by every one who has personally studied the district. If we take
Scafell Pike, with the Gable and Bowfell, as a single mountain, we have
the common centre from which there radiate at least seven important
glens--Borrowdale, with its gorgeous colouring and variegated effects
of rock and turf, leafage and river; the grave and simple beauty of
Buttermere; Ennerdale, wild and primitive, its Pillar Rock rising
like a pulpit in the midst; Wastdale, plain to the verge of ugliness,
even as an unfurnished room is plain, yet full of the sense of the
great heights that wall it round; the solitude of upper Eskdale, with
its mighty waterfalls and mountain pools; the more sociable Duddon,
and the pastoral greenery of Langdale. Surely nowhere else in Great
Britain can we stand on a hill-top with seven such valleys at our feet!
As a single starting-point for scaling each and all of these hills,
the choice would rest either on Wastdale or on Seathwaite, the little
hamlet at the extreme head of Borrowdale, noted as “the rainiest place
in England,” which means only that when it rains there it rains with a
will; they are so placed that there is hardly a summit in the district
that cannot be reached by a strong walker from these points.

Of the four chief groups which the hills of Lakeland assume--Skiddaw
to the north, Helvellyn to the east, Grasmoor to the west, and to the
south the range of Scafell--the last named is by far the most alluring
both to the nature-lover and to the climber, for it is much wilder,
rockier and more precipitous than the rest. Looking at a raised or
tinted map of the district, we might conceive this rough mountain mass
to be a great birdlike figure swooping north-eastward, to dip its beak
in Derwentwater; with Glaramara for its down-stretched head and neck,
with Great End for its elevated shoulder, from which are extended in
sweeping curves to right and left the two superb “wings” of Bowfell and
the Gable; with the Pikes as the ruffled plumes of the mighty back,
and Scafell as the dark high-spread tail. Such, we may imagine, is the
great stone eagle that flies towards the pastures of Borrowdale.

Though devoid, for the most part, of sharp peaks and ridges, and
massive rather than graceful in their general form, these Cumbrian
Pikes, like the Carnarvonshire Glyders to which in general character
they are akin, have the charm of untamed wildness; you may clamber
for weeks together over their desert of crags and coves, yet find
their wonders inexhaustible. Seamed as they are in many places by deep
“ghylls” and gullies, or carved into stark faces of rock, bristling
with projecting “pinnacles” and “pillars,” the grandest sight of all
they have to show is Mickledore Chasm, the great “door” which some
primeval force has flung open between the Pikes and Scafell; and it is
only when the range is approached from the east or the west that this
vast natural fissure, thoroughfare for the winds of heaven, can be
properly seen. The very heart of the mountain is reached when you stand
on the ridge of Mickledore, with the cliffs of Scafell towering over
you on one side and the Pikes on the other, for from this centre you
can look down into Eskdale or Wastdale, or climb to either summit, as
you choose; and here, in this huge hollow, is often a witches’ cauldron
of the clouds, which come drifting up from either valley according to
the whim of the wind, until they meet a contrary current at the top,
and are piled up in swirling masses on one side of the ridge, while
the other side, as if protected by some invisible curtain, remains
cloudless and sunlit.

Next to Mickledore in interest is Piers Gill, the gigantic cleft,
shut in by high walls of rock, which zigzags down the north slope of
the Pikes opposite the Sty Head, rivalling the Welsh “Twll Du” in
savageness and much surpassing it in beauty. Viewing it from the top
of the Great Gable, one is reminded of a monstrous serpent--a stone
serpent in the clutch of the stone eagle--writhing downwards from the
crags of Lingmell; when entered from below, it is found to be the
wildest of the many rock-ravines, veritable cañons in miniature, by
which these mountains are cloven, as witness the fine Crinkle Gill and
Hell Gill on Bowfell, and the famous Dungeon Ghyll, “so foully rent,”
on Langdale Pikes.

Turning now to the northern shoulder of the Pikes, the high promontory
of Great End, we see around us an almost unbroken continent, with a
stony isthmus leading eastward across Esk Pike to Bowfell, so shapely
a peak when seen from the Windermere lowlands; and there are few finer
walks than to follow these heights for their whole length, passing over
Crinkle Crags to the Wrynose Pass, and thence, if time and strength
allow, along the Coniston Fells to the Old Man. On the other hand, the
leftward wing from Great End, after dipping to the Sty Head, rises
steeply again to another chain of summits, the first of which is no
less glorious a goal than the crown of the Great Gable.

For, after all, it is neither to Scafell, nor to Bowfell, nor to any
lesser fell, that the mountain lover looks, when, after long absence,
the well-remembered phalanx of heights--the “tumultuous waste of huge
hill-tops,” as Wordsworth so fitly termed them--again unfolds itself
to his gaze. He looks to the Great Gable. In so far as the Cumbrian
Hills can be singly appraised, the Gable is the summit to which there
clings the strongest sentiment, by virtue both of its noble and
arresting outline, and of the grand rocks and ridges by which it is
so powerfully flanked. Its name is somewhat ill-chosen, perhaps, for
the likeness to a gable is hardly to be discovered except from the
south; from other quarters the impression is rather that of a great
round tower, or dome, a majestic sight when seen from a few miles’
distance, belted with clouds, or looming up in dark relief against an
ominous sky. Nor, when one approaches it more closely, is there any
sense of disappointment. “It’s a strange place, is Gable,” said my
Wastdale shepherd, and such will certainly be the judgment of those who
have roamed in all weathers about its shivered and rock-strewn sides.
Of the ordinary ascents, the least inspiring is that usually chosen,
from the top of the Sty Head Pass; it is far better, if you come from
Seathwaite, to follow the little beck, beloved of the water-ousel,
which joins the stream that flows from the Sty Head Tarn, and having
thus gained the saddle between the Great and the Green Gable, to skirt
the northern verge of the mountain overlooking the Ennerdale precipice,
till you reach the broad top; or, if Wastdale be your starting-point,
you can ascend by a still more fascinating route, up the long grassy
ridge known as Gavel Neese.

Close to the cairn, at the top, is the small rock-cistern in which
there is a “perennial” remnant of rain-water, idealized by several
writers, following Wordsworth, into a pure and celestial lymph. “Even
in the driest summer,” says the _History of Cumberland_ (1883), “the
sparkling liquid gushes forth from the little fount.” In truth the
pool, at its best, is but stagnant and brackish, and owing to the
habits of some tourists is now often polluted with bits of food or
newspapers; so that no worse punishment need be invoked on those who
pen such fictions than that they should themselves be forced to slake
their thirst with its waters. There is the less need to romance about
this “fount” because the three real streams that have their source on
the Gable are peculiarly fresh and sweet; in fact, there is hardly a
more charming little torrent than Gable Beck, which goes singing down
into Wastdale on the left of the Neese as you ascend.

But the chief glory of the Gable lies in the wild crags on its southern
and northern sides. Much as climbers have written of the Great Napes,
the huge outstanding stack of cliffs that seems to overhang the
traveller between Wastdale and the Sty Head, scanty justice has been
done to their strange and terrible beauty, which is enhanced by the
fact that the whole front of the mountain from which they project
is itself a precarious scree-slide of extreme steepness, so that in
looking up to these impending arêtes one surveys them not from a flat
base but from a shifty slope inclining at a sharp angle to the vale,
and they have thus all the appearance of a greater precipice upstarting
fantastically from a lesser one. Their name of “Napes” is aptly
bestowed, for they are united with the Gable by a narrow neck, where
the green turf, streaked with red undersoil, is in bright contrast to
the prevailing grey of the mountain.

Standing at the foot of the Napes, one finds in them a series of
fanlike ridges and gullies, from one of which rises the famous
Needle, subject of countless articles and photographs; and if it
be holiday-season there will probably be one or two parties either
climbing or prepared to climb. The Needle being far too slender to
accommodate many cragsmen at once, the curious sight may sometimes
be witnessed of one set of Needle-men, including more rarely a
Needle-woman, gravely waiting their turn, while their predecessors
are manœuvring in various postures on the rock. The sport of
mountaineering, it may be remarked, differs from certain other sports
in this, that, however exciting it maybe to those personally engaged,
the mere onlooker is apt to find the spectacle rather tedious; nor is
this surprising, when one remembers the large scale of the scene, and
that the progress is slow in proportion to the severity of the ascent,
a climber on the mountain-side occupying much the same position,
relatively, as a fly on the house-wall. Still, there are many of us who
would rather be spectators of such gymnastics than take an active part
in them.

The crags overlooking Ennerdale, if less peculiar than the Great Napes,
are also very impressive, and though long proclaimed “inaccessible”
have now been assiduously explored and mapped out by enterprising
climbers. A romantic interest, too, attaches to them, through the
discovery made by Mr. W. P. Haskett Smith of “a sort of hut of loose
stones, evidently the refuge of some desperate fugitive of half a
century or more ago,” who is presumed, on somewhat imperfect evidence,
to have been a smuggler,[15] but whom we should prefer to regard as a
pilgrim of the mountains, a fugitive only from the cares and worries of
an over-exacting civilization. Whether “Moses’ Sledgate,” the rather
mysterious half-obliterated old track, which may be seen winding round
the west side of the Gable, had any connexion, as Mr. Haskett Smith
surmises, with the hermitage among the crags, must be left to the
reader’s imagination; it seems more likely that the prosaic statement
of another writer, that the path was formerly used for carrying slates
from the Honister Quarries to Wastdale, is the correct one. However
that may be, all climbers will subscribe to Mr. Haskett Smith’s praise
of the Gable as “splendid to look at, splendid to look from, and
splendid to climb.” It is, in truth, a mountain of mountains, and has
the same intimate hold on the affections of the climber in Cumberland
as Tryfan has in Wales.

From the Gable it is but a step--as mountains go--to the Pillar,
of which the famous Pillar Rock is a dependency, and even those who
are not “Pillarites” in the true sense will find a rare pleasure in
scrambling around and about the Rock, which may be reached by the rough
track known as the High Level, leading direct to its foot from the top
of Black Sail Pass across the face of the fine northern front of the
fell, in the course of which “traverse” they will follow the windings
of several bold capes and green shady coves. The Rock itself, though
somewhat dwarfed by the parent mountain when viewed from a distance, is
a grand object from below, when one stands right under the great walls
which form its northern buttress.

Of the many climbers who frequent the new hotel at Wastdale Head,
now spoken of as “the Chamounix of the Lake District,” few probably
remember the place as it used to be when the fine old dalesman, William
Ritson, was the landlord, a bleak bare hostel, where the guests,
whatever their personal inclinations may have been, led emphatically
the simple life. It so happened that, in one of my early visits to
Wastdale, I was staying there with a friend at the time when the
Rev. James Jackson, the octogenarian known as “the Patriarch of the
Pillarites,” was killed on the Pillar Fell, and the last evening of
his life he spent with us at Ritson’s, narrating his own mountain
exploits, and reciting the verses in which he celebrated them. It was
the last day of April, 1878, and on the May morning the brave old man
went forth to repeat his annual pilgrimage to the Pillar Rock; we saw
him, and were probably the last to see him, plodding off with slow
step in the early twilight. Two days later, when we were coming back
to Wastdale from Buttermere, we heard shouts across Ennerdale, and
climbing up the Pillar Fell, close to the east of the Rock, in a dense
mist, we met a search party, and learnt that Mr. Jackson had not been
seen since he started. Joining in the search, we peered and groped
about the recesses of Pillar Cove, now dim and ghostly under a heavy
pall of vapour; but it was not till the next day, when the clouds had
lifted, that the body was found, as a dalesman expressed it, “ligging
under the Pillar,” the fact being that he had met his death not on the
Rock itself, but on a ledge of the steep brow above. It has been said
that his vigour was unimpaired, and that the same accident might have
happened to a boy, but to us, who were strangers to him, he gave the
impression of much physical weakness, and, as the sequel proved, so
far from being in a fit state to scale a dangerous crag, he was not
capable of crossing the easy ridge which gives access to it. So strong
is the fascination of the mountains, which can lure an old pilgrim of
eighty-two years thus to sacrifice himself at their shrine!

Of the other ranges of the Lake District--Helvellyn, Saddleback,
Grasmoor, and their kin--differing widely as they do from the Scafell
group in their smoother contours and less savage rock-scenery, little
need here be said; but there is at least one distinctive feature in
which they excel, and that is the number and keenness of their “edges.”
To a connoisseur in climbing, there is always a great attraction in the
mountain which may be approached by a narrow stair--

    The peak that stormward bares an edge
    Ground sharp in days when Titans warred--

and herein is the unfailing charm of such otherwise formless masses as
Saddleback and Helvellyn. Who, for instance, would ascend Helvellyn by
that ponderous bank above Wythburn, when he might have Striding Edge
for his upward path and Swirrel Edge for his return? And why should
any one climb Saddleback by its toilsome grassy slopes, when an ideal
course is offered him in Sharp Edge, overlooking Scales Tarn, and in
Narrow Edge, which falls away with scarcely less sharpness from the
highest summit? I have named the most famous of these edges, but many
others not greatly inferior will suggest themselves; thus Fairfield may
be delightfully taken by the narrow ridges of Cofa Pike and Hartsop
Dodd, and even the bulky Grasmoor assumes an air of refinement, if
scaled by the slim reef of Whiteside, or by the slender arm that
it holds out to the promontory of Causey Pike. In old days these
knife-edges were reputed difficult and perilous. “The awful curtain
of rock named Striding Edge,” is De Quincey’s description of the
chief ornament of Helvellyn; and Green, in describing his adventurous
crossing of Sharp Edge on Saddleback, speaks of the necessity “either
of bestriding the ridge, or of moving on one of its sides with hands
lying over the top, as a security against falling into the tarn on the
left or into a frightful gully on the right.” What was once a terror
has now become a joy to the climber of ordinary powers, but to this
day one may hear expressions of the old misgivings. A friend who had
come over the edges of Saddleback told me afterwards that he had felt
“sick with fear,” and I have heard a tourist on Snowdon, fresh from the
passage of the Beddgelert “Saddle,” exclaim in solemn accents, “It is a
thing to be done once in a lifetime, and no more.” In winter, however,
all is changed, and these ridges are then made really formidable by
the frozen snow-drifts, which can often transform a steep bank into a
dangerous ice-slope, with a veritable razor-edge for its summit.

And here, though it is to the shrine of Scafell that we are on
pilgrimage, a few words must be said in praise of Borrowdale’s other
guardian height. “What was the great Parnassus’ self to thee?” wrote
Wordsworth, addressing Skiddaw; and the rock-climber smiles at the
question, for Skiddaw, having no rocks, is more attractive to the
tripper than to the cragsman. Yet no true lover of mountains will
fail to delight in Skiddaw, though it must be confessed that the
ordinary way of ascent, leading along the dullest part of the range,
which overlooks the treeless “forest,” does its utmost to make the
mountain seem uninteresting. It is significant of the local apathy and
lack of initiative, in dealing with mountain scenery, that a route
which was originally chosen in the days when such ascents were made
on horseback should still be the only recognized one for pedestrians,
and that the tourist, after following the path up dreary slopes to the
summit, should still retrace his steps by the same way--unless he is so
fortunate as to be lost in the mist, and to gain a new experience of
Skiddaw by some irregular and more exciting descent.

For the real charm of Skiddaw lies in its southern and western
portions, facing Derwentwater and Bassenthwaite, and the descent, at
least, should be made in this direction, over the great shoulder known
as Carlside, from which one may turn right or left, along the narrow
ridge of Longside, or down the lovely glen of Millbeck. It is from
this point that one can best appreciate, at close quarters, the beauty
as well as the bulk of Skiddaw. Every one who has been in Borrowdale
is familiar with the clear-cut outline of the mountain, standing out
so simple and shapely against the northern sky, and flanked on either
hand by the wooded promontories of Latrigg and the Dodd--a picture
which is in marked contrast to the notched and jagged battlements of
Scafell--and there is certainly a wonderful symmetry in the massive
buttresses, alternating with the deep-grooved glens, rounded off, like
a piece of sculpture, in flawless lines. But, seen closer, the mountain
reveals itself as a vast slope of varied colour and composition,
smooth everywhere, but patched and streaked with long strips of shale,
or grass, or heather, which hang down the great breast of the hill
for many hundreds of feet with surprising steepness. At the top is
a wilderness of stone, below it a green tract of turf or bilberry,
merging into purple heather or wide fields of fern, and all so subtly
woven and blended as to produce, especially in late summer and autumn,
a rich combination of tints. The Millbeck Valley, in particular,
divided by a pyramid-shaped buttress which juts out from Carlside, is
then most gorgeously clad in a vestment of many textures and hues.

Not less delightful, though for the most part unknown, is the descent
by Longside, a sharp spur, quite unlike the general character of the
mountain, which runs out north-westward from Carlside and culminates in
Ullock Pike; from which point, looking across a wild glen, one has the
most impressive of all near views of Skiddaw, sinking from cope to base
in a colossal steep of bare screes, which by its very monotony baffles
the eye of the spectator and cheats calculation as to its height.

I will say, then, that Skiddaw, albeit despised of climbers, is as
well worth knowing, in its own distinctive character, as Scafell
itself; but those who would know it must seek it not by the beaten
track but by the pathless solitudes where the raven still flies
undisturbed. Approach it in the right spirit, and Skiddaw will open
its heart to you, and you will learn that it is none the less a great
mountain because you cannot break your neck upon its slopes.




IV

Pleasures of the Heights


“What pleasure lives in height? the shepherd sang.” Only a very
lovesick shepherd, who had his own reasons for praising the valley at
the expense of the mountain, could have asked a question so foolish;
for the pleasures of the heights are manifold and beyond count. Let us
consider a few of these pleasures, just those cheap and simple ones
which are in the reach of anybody who, without aspiring to be a skilled
rock-climber or Alpinist, is drawn by his love for our English or Welsh
hills to spend long days among their solitudes, and to cope with the
difficulties, such as they are, of weather and season in planning and
effecting his ascents--the choice of routes, the fording of streams,
the avoidance of precipices, and the keeping of the right course in
dense and blinding mists.

Equipped, then, with a modicum of food, with map, compass, and
field-glasses, we sally forth emancipated from all that usually deadens
us to the direct messages of Nature. For it is one of Nature’s citadels
that we are scaling, and we know not in which of her varying moods
we shall find her; but we know that in these uplands all her moods
are beautiful, and that it is not the fair-weather climber that is
privileged to comprehend them best. Here, at least, is a region where
in all seasons, and in all weathers, not a sight or sound but brings
contentment to the mind.

It has been remarked by Elisée Reclus, in his charming _History of a
Mountain_, that of all forms of travel to travel upwards is the most
instructive, for by climbing a few thousand feet we enjoy more novel
experiences than in a lateral journey of as many miles, and it often
happens that the first experience of the climber, as of the aeronaut,
is to find himself in the country of the clouds.

As we start up the valley, perhaps, the “white horses” of last night’s
rain-storms are still racing down the slopes, and our staircase of
mingled grass and rock bears the shadow of the dense cloud overhead--a
scene of unrelieved dreariness to those who are unaware of what glories
it may be the gateway. Toiling upwards, we reach the swirling fringe
of vapour, which closes gradually round us and wraps from us all view
of the familiar landscape below. Still on and up we press, till, as we
set foot on the higher ridges, the magic of cloud-land begins; for lo!
what in the ordinary light of day were mere rocks and buttresses are
changed now and magnified into mysterious shadowy forms, looming dimly
out upon us from the mist, until we half wonder whether the compass
or our own memory has misled us, and we have strayed into some strange
unmapped district where the air is thick with phantoms. Often and often
have I had such thought, when beclouded on the great rocky plateau of
the Glyders or Scafell Pikes, or groping my way along one of the narrow
“cribs” of Carnarvonshire or one of the Cumberland “edges”; and I do
not think that any one imbued with the love of mountains would exchange
these hours of cloudy surmisings for all the crystal skies that give
the “views”, so desired of tourists, from the top. Not that I would
undervalue the exhilarating sensation--unlike anything else in life--of
reaching the summit of a mountain; but to the true mountaineer all
other interests are subordinate to the fact of the mountain-presence
itself, even if that presence be veiled, as it often is, in remorseless
drift of rain-cloud.

For it may be admitted that mountains, like some other objects of
human affection, are apt to subject their lovers to a chilling ordeal,
days and weeks of repeated denials and disappointments, until at times
the most ardent may despond; or if one present himself as a returned
prodigal, seeking instant favour after absence, he may but find, as
Thoreau expressed it, that there has been killed for him “the fatted
cloud.” But to the faithful there will come at last, quite suddenly and
unexpectedly perhaps, a moment which makes such gracious amends that
all past unkindnesses are forgotten. You are standing, it may be, on
some high ridge or summit, drenched with rain, buffeted by winds, and
wondering if perchance any sign is to be vouchsafed to you. The mist
floats by in thick interminable volume. But see! What is that small
dark rift in the grey monotonous curtain? Wider and wider it grows,
until it is framed there, like a magic stage among the clouds, and
through that gap, where a moment before you saw but twenty paces, you
may now see as many miles, a fair expanse of valleys, lakes and rivers,
with the sea gleaming in the background. Another moment, and it is
gone--to be restored again, and withdrawn again, in quick succession--a
shifting scene more glorious than ever eye has witnessed, save in the
region of clouds or dreams.

In a thick mist, such as is apt to enfold with extreme suddenness the
hills of which I speak, perhaps not to release them for days from its
shadowy grip, the careful use of a compass is almost a necessity,
except in places where the landmarks are familiar and beyond mistake;
for the transformation which the mountains undergo is surprising even
to those who know them best; and if once the true sense of direction
be lost, it is most difficult to recover it, especially on broad,
smooth plateaus or hillsides where there are no sharp-featured rocks.
In the ascent there is less likelihood of going astray, for there is
but one summit, and by climbing we shall find it; but in descending
there is always a greater possibility of error, with the chance, if we
get on the wrong side of the watershed, of emerging some twenty miles
away from home. The sensation of thus coming down on the reverse side
of a mountain range is most perplexing, for at first sight, and until
we can readjust our minds to the fact, everything seems confused, the
quarters of the horizon have changed places, north is south, and we
can hardly believe that our left is not our right. A friend of mine
who was lost on Snowdon in a mist, made his way down, as he thought,
towards Llanberis, with the intention of thence walking rightward
to Pen-y-Gwryd; he reached a road which he took to be the pass of
Llanberis, and duly turned to the right. Not until after he had
walked some miles did he discover that he was well on the way towards
Carnarvon, having descended, without knowing it, on the wrong side of
Snowdon and into a different part of Wales.

To be lost in a fog is of course no uncommon experience among strangers
who cross the fells. On one occasion (not strictly to be classed among
“pleasures” of the heights), when descending from Scafell Pike to
Langdale in furious storm and cloud, I met near Angle Tarn a wandering,
one-eyed tramp, who presented about as miserable an appearance as human
being could attain. The proverbial “drowned rat” would have scorned to
exchange plight with him. He had been discharged, he told me, a few
days before, from a hospital in a northern town, where they had taken
out one of his eyes without consulting him, and with the remaining eye
he was seeking his way to a relative at Keswick by the Stake Pass,
from which he had hopelessly wandered. As we descended Rossett Gill
together, for I took him back to Langdale, he confided to me that this
was his first experience of a mountain, and he thought it would suffice
till his death--an event which, but for his happening to meet our
party, would probably not have been long delayed.

A strange effect is produced, when one is descending, if the clouds are
descending too; for the deepening mist then makes the delay in reaching
sunlight seem endless. Down and down we go, and the gloom is still
beneath us, until we begin to wonder, like the first voyagers on the
Atlantic, whether we are sinking into some bottomless abyss from which
it may be impossible to re-arise; it becomes a burden and nightmare to
the mind; then at last there is a darkening of the vapour in one spot,
and far below we see the jet-black water of a tarn, or a bit of brown
mountain-side across the glen.

More inspiriting is the effect of climbing through and above the
clouds, as one sometimes can do, until one looks down from an upper
land of sunshine on a sea of mist below, from which the rocky peaks and
promontories emerge like islands. It occasionally happens, when some
high ridge is bathed in cloud on one side and in sun on the other, that
a climber, standing on the edge of the gulf, will see a small circular
rainbow projected on the mist, with his own head forming the centre of
it--a rare and curious experience for the wayworn pilgrim, thus to find
his image, like that of a saint, with a halo round his head, emblazoned
on the mountain vapours! Who shall say that the modern pilgrim is not
blessed, as his forerunners were, with celestial apparitions? The first
time I saw this phenomenon was on the ridge of Ben Nevis. I have also
seen it from Blaven, in Skye, and from the top of Scafell, looking down
into the cloud-filled chasm of Mickledore.

Not less marvellous are the transformations of the clouds themselves,
when, after a spell of storm, they break up under triumphant sunshine
and drift disbanded along the slopes. I remember how once, descending
from Tryfan after a wet and dismal day, and returning across the low
grassy moorlands to Capel Curig, I witnessed that strange form of
mountain mirage recorded by Wordsworth in “The Excursion.” The corner
of the valley above Llyn Ogwen was filled with dense mists, which came
seething and boiling out of the hollow like steam from a cauldron, and
as they broke up into small wisps and wreaths, under combined wind and
sunshine, gave an extraordinary appearance to the northern front of
Carnedd Dafydd, which was enveloped in a maze of billowy vapour, until
it was impossible to distinguish rock from cloud or cloud from rock,
and the illusion was exactly that which the poet has described:

    Clouds, mists, streams, watery rocks and emerald turf,
    Clouds of all tincture, rocks and sapphire sky,
    Confused, commingled, mutually inflamed
                   …
    In fleecy folds voluminous enwrapped.

It is nearly fifty years since I saw that sight, but we do not forget
what we see among mountains as what we read in books.

There dwell in the memory too (for I must not give the impression that
the mountains are always scourged with storm) the days and sometimes
weeks in succession when the weather is without a flaw--trance-like
spells when the hills stand calm and pensive in every vicissitude
of loveliness, now clear and imminent, with ridges sharply outlined
against the sky, now dim and ghostly, half shrouded in a mild and
breathless haze. But even the loveliest day is seldom perfected without
the ministry of cloud, for clouds are the Genii of the mountains,
concealing much, but revealing more, by their presence, and bringing
to view the manifold depths and distances that would otherwise be
unobserved. You cannot learn the moods and character of a mountain
until you have studied its attendant clouds.

Nor must the pleasures of winter be overlooked, for, as Southey wrote
of the mountains:

    Who sees them only in their summer hour,
    Sees but their beauties half, and knows not half their power.

It was pointed out by the same writer that snow, instead of making the
view of the fells monotonous, has a contrary effect, “it brings out all
their recesses, and differentiates all their inequalities.” Even clouds
are scarcely more efficacious in revealing the hitherto unnoticed
distances; for the snow, when not too deep, is a mask which does not
conceal, but takes a delicate impression of the hillside, so that
every crack and crinkle, every unsuspected groove, ravine, terrace, or
even sheep-path, is made to stand out in clear relief. To rocks, in
particular, a thin powdering of snow will give a strange, chequered,
almost ethereal look, reminding one of Scott’s lines about Melrose
Abbey seen under moonlight:

    When buttress and buttress, alternately,
    Seem framed of ebon and ivory.

In the joy felt by the experienced climber on arriving at his
mountain-top the view, perhaps, plays but a subordinate part, though
there is always a fascination in a very distant prospect across sea
or plain, such as one may get in the early morning, or when the air
is clear after a rain shower or a snow squall, as when, from Wales or
Cumberland, as the case may be, one sees the Isle of Man resting like a
dream on the water, with a pillow of fleecy cloud around it. In this
respect the views from the two districts are very similar, for on every
side except the east their horizons extend to the sea, and both possess
the same great charm, lacking in the Alps and other continental ranges,
of overlooking a coast-line broken by shallow estuaries, where at low
tide there is an expanse of gleaming red sands, with the plain of dim
blue water in the rear. To have seen Snowdon from Scafell, or Scafell
from Snowdon, across the hundred miles that lie between them, is a rare
privilege which few climbers have enjoyed, and of which, in spite of
many visits to either mountain, I cannot personally speak; far more
often it is the great northern headland of Carnedd Llewelyn which is
discerned from the Cumbrian hills and bars the further view. Apart from
such remarkable sights as these, the pleasure of the summit, I think,
arises chiefly from that sense of _power_ to which a wide outlook
contributes--you feel how vast a territory you “command” from your airy
fortress; you are for the moment an overseer of men, a super-man, with
all the kingdoms of the world stretched at your feet.

Having spoken of the sights, let me speak of the sounds of the
mountain, for the ear is not less fascinated than the eye in these
echoing temples, where the upper cloughs and chambers are as huge
whispering galleries, and sounds are often carried from immense
distances, yet in so modulated and subtle a tone as to leave a
haunting impression on the mind. There is a solemnity about these
mountain voices which is only comparable, on a larger scale, to
the effects produced in the hollow space of a cathedral; hence the
perfect appropriateness, as has been pointed out, of Wordsworth’s much
criticized reference to the “solemn voice” of the mountain lamb. The
singing of the stream below, the deep croak of the raven as he sails on
his straight course overhead, the shrill cry of the wheeling buzzard,
the bleat of a sheep and even the noise of a detached stone falling
from the cliff to the screes, come to us with a significance which
would hardly be intelligible elsewhere. The wind, too, has some strange
things to tell us, as it tears itself into shreds on the rocks, or
lifts the water from the tarns and streams and dashes it in spray to
the sky, or startles us with muffled subterranean sobbings as we cross
some exposed ridge. Listening among the higher mountains in rough or
cloudy weather, we may hear sounds so wild and mysterious that their
origin wholly baffles us. There is also felt, at times, a strange
apprehension--or should we say premonition?--of the presence of human
beings, which may be due to the ear having become unconsciously aware
of their approach, if not to some other sense more poignant and occult.

One sometimes sees strange companionships on mountains. Once, when
I was on the Glyder Fach with some friends, we heard the steps of a
party ascending by the steep northern screes from Cwm Tryfan, and
presently two men came into sight, the leader with a cloak thrown over
his shoulder in cavalier-like style, the follower in the garb of a
serving man. In this manner they crossed the summit-plateau, and when
they neared the edge of the southern escarpment, the valet (for that
he was valet, not guide, we inferred both from his demeanour and the
order of their procession) dropped respectfully to the rear, while
his master stood for some time as if wrapped in thought, and gazing
out over the wide scene that had Cardigan Bay as its limit. Then, the
reverie ended, he turned back towards Cwm Tryfan, and followed by
his demure attendant, descended as he had come. Was he a prince or a
poet, we wondered; and if a poet, how could his sensitiveness bear the
near presence of a servant--a servant!--in that great freedom of the
mountain, where one would expect the distinctions of rank to disappear?

The voices of the mountain streams become, of course, less powerful in
proportion to the height to which the traveller attains, until from the
distant summits he hears them only in fitful intervals, now clear, now
hushed, according to the force and direction of the wind; but alike in
the valley and on the hillside there is that singular aerial quality
in the sound which makes it different to all other voices in Nature.
This is the music which De Quincey described as like that “of pealing
anthems, as if streaming from the open portals of some illimitable
cathedral,” and he adds, with special reference to the river Brathay,
in Langdale, that “such a sound does actually arise, in many states
of the weather, from the peculiar action of the river upon its rocky
bed; and many times I have heard it, of a quiet night, when no stranger
could have been persuaded to believe it other than the sound of choral
chanting, distant, solemn, saintly.” The same illusion, if it be an
illusion, may be felt by one who rests with closed eyes on the bank of
any of the small steep becks, which go purling down the slopes, to feed
the larger rivers below.

And now for the joys of the descent. The regret with which the mountain
lover turns his back on the summits and leaves

    The monstrous ledges there to slope, and spill
    Their thousand wreaths of dangling water-smoke,

is tempered with the pleasure of choosing some well-pounded scree-slope
or soft grassy stair, down which he may race, with the skill and
sureness of foot which long practice has given him, towards the abodes
of men, and, like a miser turned spendthrift, may squander in one wild
fling the thousands of upward steps so laboriously amassed. It is
extraordinary with what speed, given suitable foothold, you may run
from top to bottom of a mountain which it took you hours to climb; the
Alpine glissade is hardly more glorious. Then, if the day be hot, there
awaits you that supreme reward and crown of your labours--the bath.

Can bliss be greater than that of coming down sun-scorched and
footsore, to the divine cool streams which fall from hill to valley
through a series of rock-pools, each a fit bath-place for an emperor,
or to the lakes which tempt the swimmer below, or to the sea itself,
never far distant from these mountains? To bathe after a stern day on
the heights is the elysium of the climber; no ordinary mortals can
understand the passion with which he betakes himself to the healing
waters. After coming off the Glyders in a burning sun, I have known the
traveller leap into Llyn Idwal, to the consternation of its motionless
fishermen; I have seen wonder, too, in the faces of wood-cutters by
Buttermere, at the sight of a fellow-being rushing down crazed, as they
thought, from the banks of High Stile, and plunging into the lake even
while a thunderstorm burst overhead. Assuredly the Delectable Mountains
themselves can contain nothing more delectable than their streams.

There is a reckless joy, too, in the descent on a wet and stormy
afternoon, when, after facing rain and wind for hours on the ridges,
we return home drenched and weather-beaten, with the exhilaration
that arises in the mind which has nothing to hope or to fear. Indeed,
the foul day has its proper place, no less than the fair day, in the
economy of the hills, when the rain-curtain is drawn visibly across the
valley, and scores of white runnels are coursing down the slopes, and
the voice of the swollen river sounds hoarser every hour, while it
rises as only a mountain river can rise.

Such are some of the pleasures which the mountaineer is heir to. But
whether we leave the heights in calm or storm, in sunshine or shadow,
we leave them only for the moment; we descend, but with an inner
prompting to return. However prosperous our ascent may have been, there
is always the something left undone, the ridge unclimbed or valley
unexplored, which is the spur to further effort. Here, if nowhere else
in the land, the sense of satiety is unknown; and it is to this mental
tonic, even more than to the bracing air of the heights, that we owe
the unwearied spirit which nerves us to walk more leagues upon the
mountains than we could walk miles upon the plain. For in the lowlands
we walk with the body only; in the highlands we walk also with the
mind.




V

Wild Life


To the rambler upon these hills few things are so attractive, next to
the hills themselves, as the glimpses which he gains into the ways
of the non-human people that have their homes there. It thrills us
to remember that the mountains, lonely though we call them, have for
centuries on centuries had their own populous dramas of life and death,
and that their rocky tenements were inhabited, in some cases down
to comparatively modern times, by the bear, the wolf, the boar, the
wild cat, and other hardy outlaws that now exist but in a name or a
tradition; but while we must lament the loss of such peaceful animals
as the beaver, spoken of by Giraldus Cambrensis as still resident
on one Welsh stream in the twelfth century,[16] and the stag, now
surviving only in a corner of the Lake District, we need not affect
to regret the disappearance of the more savage beasts of prey, for
banditti, whether human or non-human, must be subdued.

And it is one of the compensating advantages of the destruction of
the greater “game” that the mountains are no longer a hunting-place.
You may walk where you will, round Snowdon or round Scafell, without
the fear of being turned back, as so often happens in the Scotch
highlands, by the nuisance of game-preserving; nor will your own
feelings be harassed by the spectacle of a troop of deer-stalkers,
or other blood-sportsmen intent on “killing something.” There is, of
course, fishing in plenty, but that, as far as I have watched it in
these upland places, is an exercise rather of faith and imagination
than of the red right hand; at any rate one seldom _sees_ the fisherman
catch anything, and the “fool with a gun” is now as rare a sight
as the rare birds whom his forerunners have “dropped”--to use that
telling expression of the game-keepers. Fox-hunting on foot goes on
to some extent in the winter months; but the need of killing these
mischievous pilferers is here a reality, and not, as in fashionable
hunting-counties, a sham, and we may rightly wish to see the fox
exterminated as the wolf has been--a far humaner and more rational
course than that of “preserving” him to be tortured by huntsmen. The
otter-worry, that very mean form of cruelty, is carried on in the lower
valleys of a few mountain districts, where the pools are large and
deep, but climbers on the hills are in little danger of meeting with
the motley rabble who partake in it.

Here, then, is another goodly feature of mountaineering, that, as
one of its accomplished masters, Mr. Owen Glynne Jones, observed, it
“does not claim the sacrifice of beasts and fishes.” The craft of
climbing is a fine physical training which, as a school of manliness
and self-reliance, immeasurably transcends the wretched amateur
butchery that masquerades as “sport.” “The mountaineer,” says Reclus,
“experiences, like the huntsman, the delight of conquest after toil,
yet he enjoys the pleasure all the more, in that he has risked none but
his own life; he has kept his hands unstained.”

In the absence of the larger kinds of wild animals that have gone down
under the stress of what we call civilization, it is to the mountain
birds that we first turn with interest. We think at once of the golden
eagle, in regions where the names of so many cliffs recall his former
sovereignty; and those who have seen the great bird, as I have, flying
in freedom among the mountains of Skye, and, as happened on one
occasion I recall, mobbed by dwarfish-looking ravens, as a kestrel is
mobbed by sparrows, on the shores of Loch Coruisk, until he sailed off
on wide wings across the corrie, cannot but regret that he is no longer
known in his traditional haunts on Snowdon, or on his famous crag in
Borrowdale. But when we read in old books of travel, such as West’s
_Guide to the Lakes in Cumberland_ (1781), that “the devastation made
on the fold in the breeding-season, by one eyrie, was computed at a
lamb a day,” we understand why the doom of the eagle was even then
unavoidable and why it became “a common species of traffic,” as another
author described it, “to supply the curious with young eagles, in the
taking of which the inhabitants were very expert.”[17]

I was told by a sheep-farmer in Scotland, who had trapped or shot over
a score of these feathered freebooters, that for an eagle to carry off
a plump lamb from the pastures there is need of a freshening breeze
to lift the mighty wings; he had seen cases when, in dull listless
weather, the bird was unable to rise with its quarry, and on the
approach of the shepherd was obliged to abandon it and flap reluctantly
away.

A lady who had been pained to see a golden eagle “for sale,” once
asked me whether, in the event of her ransoming the captive, it would
be possible to set him at liberty on some mountain height, and for a
time I was rather dazzled by the idea of releasing the imperial bird
from the top of Snowdon or Scafell, or, if the companionship of other
eagles was desired, from some far northern peak; but on my consulting
a well-known ornithologist he assured me that the eagle, cramped by
long imprisonment, would probably be unable to fly, and that if he did
fly he would almost certainly fall a victim to some local “sportsman,”
or be pecked to death by his wild congeners, if there were any in the
neighbourhood; so in the face of these discouraging predictions the
project was given up.

Eagles, then, we have none in our Welsh and English mountains, and the
kite having now been reduced to so poor a remnant as to be numbered
with the lost British birds, we turn perforce to the buzzard and the
peregrine as the two most noteworthy representatives of the family of
the Falcons. The fiery-hearted peregrine, or “falcon-hawk,” as the
dalesmen call him, still breeds on certain rocky ramparts, whence he
can overlook the valleys and dart forth unerringly on any passing prey.
An eye-witness once described to me how a falcon, having struck down
one of two pigeons in a field at the head of Langdale, and being scared
from his victim by some harvesters who saw the chase, rose instantly
and was off at lightning speed after the other pigeon over the ridge of
Bowfell!

We look in vain to the buzzard for such indomitable energies; yet it
is a grand sight to watch him sailing aloft in leisurely circles, or
hanging poised, as he sometimes does, off the edge of some broken
escarpment, so near that you can see his barred feathers and quickly
glancing eye. On a misty day in rounding a sharp headland, I have
sometimes come suddenly upon a perched buzzard at only a few yards’
distance, and have seen him flutter up in a panic, to lose himself in
the clouds; in the nesting season the bird will occasionally “shadow”
an intruding climber almost as the curlew does, and follow him at close
distance along the ridge of the mountain until he has conducted him off
his estate. I have frequently seen buzzards and ravens sparring at each
other in the sky, in that desultory and ineffective manner of warfare
which many birds seem to adopt.

The raven, who, in default of the eagle, divides with the buzzard
the empire of the crags is, perhaps, the most interesting bird that
now claims our attention; and robber though he is, we are always
glad to hear his deep “_kronk_,” or his wild dog-like bark, before
the black form is seen skirting the edge of the precipice or winging
straight across the glen. It is somewhat strange that in spite of
the persecution of shepherds, the cupidity of collectors, and the
inroads of rock-climbers, so large a bird can still find undisturbed
breeding-places, and maintain his numbers as well as he does among
our British hills; but I think the case of the raven, as far as these
districts are concerned, is hardly so desperate as ornithologists give
us to understand. To walk for several hours among the Carnarvonshire
or the Cumberland mountains without evidence of ravens, is in my
experience rather unusual, and at times one may see them there in
great strength; a few years ago, for example, I watched nine birds one
August afternoon soaring and skimming with playful antics along the
edge of Grasmoor, and so intent on their game that they allowed me to
come within quite close range; on another occasion I saw more than a
score of them rise together from the side of Skiddaw, doubtless from a
carrion feast.

It is astonishing how near this wary outlaw will approach to
dwelling-houses in the early summer mornings before mankind is on the
stir. It so happened that from the cottage at Capel Curig where I used
to stay, I could see a section of the hillside above as I lay in bed,
and on two successive mornings I was puzzled by what seemed to be a
concourse of large fowls hopping and squabbling, a few hundred yards
from my window, round some object on the bank. On further investigation
I found this object to be the carcase of a sheep, and the combatants to
be hungry ravens “on the grab.”

But there are other and more cheery singers in the mountain choir. In
the early summer, when the bird-life of these upland valleys is at
its prime, two voices above all others are resonant along the Welsh
hillsides, those of the cuckoo and the curlew, who fill the clear
air with their clear melody the whole of the long June day, and not
a little of the night. There are, perhaps, few sounds in wild nature
more fascinating than the curlew’s call, starting, as it does, with its
strange single note, and gradually rising and breaking into what seems
like rings and bubbles of exquisitely liquid song, which fall here and
there on the grey moorland while the singer is often unseen. As for
the cuckoo, that _improbus anser_ of the hills, there are seasons when
he seems to be ubiquitous; you pass him shouting in the valley as you
start out; you meet him again and again about the middle region of
heathery boulders and grass slopes; and when you emerge on the sky-line
and think you have left him far below, his voice comes after you, as
jubilant as ever, and pursues you to the very cairn on the top.

Familiar friends, also, are the ring-ousel, or, as some call him, the
rock-ousel, and the wheatear; the one as fussy and loquacious as his
lowland cousin, the blackbird (thanks to his outcry, I have sometimes
found his nest on a ledge of steep heather-covered rock, as under the
northern front of Tryfan); the other flitting silent and watchful, with
quick jerky movements, from stone to stone, or along the grey wall on
the mountain. These with the ever-welcome meadow-pipit, are rarely
absent from the hillside. Of the river birds there is none that has so
strong a hold on the affections of the mountaineer as the water-ousel,
delightful little sprite of the tumbling becks and eddies, from which
his very being seems inseparable. No writer with whom I am acquainted
has paid a juster tribute to the many charms of the water-ousel than
the author of _The Mountains of California_, whose chapter on the
American variety of the bird (_Cinclus Mexicanus_) recalls many of
the traits of our English “dipper” as we have known him, none too
plentifully, beside his native streams and pools. The grey wagtail and
the sandpiper will be found in similar haunts.

The beasts of the mountain, as viewed by the passing observer are, with
one exception, less interesting, because less wild, than the birds;
for the fox and the “mart” are seldom seen by the climber, who, in his
eagerness to reach his goal, has no time to devote, as the naturalist
would, to a patient watching of their haunts. The exception is the
wild goat, which, strange to say, is not known as a British species
by the majority of naturalists, though it has much more right to that
distinction than the “wild” Chillingham cattle; for it is a fact that
on some of the Welsh mountains as on some Scottish islands, there are
still herds of goats which, if not indigenous (that claim, it seems,
is disproved by their mixed colours and the shape of their horns), are
yet living in a state of absolute freedom and wildness, full of courage
and resource, and able to hold their own under hardships of climate
which no domestic animal could endure, and there is little doubt that
these herds, though descended from escaped animals, and reinforced
from time to time by “strays” that have taken to the hills, are of
very great antiquity. They used to be common, a century or less ago,
in a number of craggy spots, such as the Pass of Aberglaslyn, from
which they have now been driven; but a remnant may still be seen on the
Rhinog Fawr, and a few other lonely ranges, by those who approach them
with due care.[18] It was lately stated in a London paper that “wild
goat stalking among the Hebrides can fairly stand comparison with ibex
shooting”; and I can remember, some forty-five years ago, hearing some
talk at Pen-y-Gwryd about an expedition to Snowdon to shoot goats.
There are as few goats as eagles on Snowdon now; but I can testify that
the sport is an excellent one when the field-glass is substituted for
the rifle, for in this way I have stalked some fine goats on the Rhinog
and elsewhere, and have rejoiced to see them go bounding across the
cliffs in style that would do credit to the Swiss chamois or the white
goat of the Rockies. I was told that there was a similar herd on the
Yewdale Fells, near Coniston; but the only wild goat that I have seen
in the Lake District was a solitary one whom I surprised, in a steep
and secluded hollow, on the rocky side of Glaramara.

These wild Welsh goats must not be confused with the half-domesticated
herds which it was the custom until about fifty years ago to keep on
the hills as sheep are now kept. We are told by Cliffe in his _Book of
North Wales_ (1851) that “but few of the national animal, the goat,
are now kept, in consequence of the injury which they have done to
the young plantations”; and the same writer gives a vivid account of
a goat-hunt--apparently of the wild animal--which he witnessed on the
Rhinog.

    While ascending we heard much shouting, and barking of dogs,
    intermingled with piercing shrieks. Then we passed a gigantic
    snow-white billy-goat, with his legs tied, struggling at
    intervals convulsively, and uttering very shrill cries.
    Presently we came in sight of several men in a narrower part
    of the Pass, striving to capture another white billy-goat
    of greater size and even longer horns. The animal had taken
    refuge, after a long chase, on a very narrow ledge in a
    precipice, and apparently bid defiance to his pursuers. At last
    he bounded suddenly from a great height, and ran rapidly over
    broken rocks and heath for about six hundred yards, with the
    pack of dogs close at his heels, who ultimately brought him up,
    but were kept at bay by his horns.

From the mountain goats we pass naturally to the mountain sheep,
who, though nominally domesticated, are so little subject to human
interference and live so great a portion of their lives at large upon
the hills, that as compared with our dull southern breeds they may
almost be regarded as wild animals. Very familiar to every one who has
spent much time on the mountains is the sharp “sneeze” of the sheep as
he gives warning to his fellows that a stranger is approaching. Writing
of the Welsh sheep, half a century ago, Cliffe tells us that they
differed entirely in their habits from those of an enclosed country.
“Roaming wherever inclination leads them, confined by few or no fences,
they are obliged for mutual defence against foxes, ravens, and other
birds of prey, to form parties of ten or twelve, of which number, if
one perceives anything advancing towards the little flock, he turns
and faces the object, when, if its appearance be hostile, he warns his
companions by a shrill whistling noise, and the whole scamper off to
the more inaccessible wilds.”

Since this was written, the extent of many pasture-lands has been
lessened; but there are still places where the sheep have a whole
mountain, or several mountains, to roam over, and live in a state of
considerable freedom and liveliness. An old man who used to spend the
summer months at the top of a high pass in the Lake District, where
he sold refreshments to tourists, and slept in a little hut built
right into the steep hillside, told me that his only discomfort arose
from the noisy gambols of the sheep, who kept him awake by disporting
themselves on his grassy roof after nightfall. Thus, like the lady in
_Locksley Hall_, he must lie and ponder--

    In the dead unhappy night, and when the _ram_ is on the roof.

Imagine any one suffering in this manner from the frolics of our
south-country _muttons_!

The mountain lambs, especially, have a rare sprightliness and beauty,
and there is scarcely a more lovely picture to be seen among the
hills than one of these superb little creatures poised intrepid on
a high rock or wall as the traveller passes below, and looking down
on him with an innocent and wistful curiosity. Such a sight makes it
pitiful to remember to what base uses man has turned the sheep, and
how degraded is the domestic breed, as we commonly see it, from the
glorious wild animals described in the _Mountains of California_. “The
domestic sheep,” says Muir, “is expressionless, like a dull bundle of
something only half alive, while the wild is as elegant and graceful as
a deer, every movement manifesting admirable strength and character.
The tame is timid; the wild is bold. The tame is always more or less
ruffled and dirty; while the wild is as smooth and clean as flowers of
his mountain pastures.”

The sheep of the Welsh hills and the Cumbrian fells is a sort of
connecting-link between Muir’s _ovis montana_ and the silly creature
of our meadows; but it must be admitted that he sadly lacks the
marvellous climbing powers of his wilder relative, for when he ventures
on the tempting ledges of turf that intersect the sheer precipices
he sometimes shares the fate of the “meek mountain lamb” in Scott’s
“Helvellyn.”

I once saw an unfortunate “cragbound” sheep on a narrow and very
dangerous terrace that overhangs the great eastern verge of Tryfan,
where, having eaten all the grass on the ledge, she was peering
nervously about, trying to summon up the courage to make a backward
leap to safety. After descending from the mountain, I called at the
farm below, and got a promise that the sheep should somehow be saved
from its plight; but on the following day I found the same tragedy
proceeding. Again I sought and received assurances from the shepherds
that they would go with ropes to the rescue, but as I had to leave
Wales the next morning I never learnt the sequel, which I fear may have
yielded more satisfaction to the ravens than to the sheep.

If the mountain sheep must be deemed half wild, can less be said of
that lean, gaunt, hungry, savage, but highly intelligent animal, the
sheep-dog of Cumberland or Wales? It is one thing to see these “friends
of man” in their educated capacity, collecting or dispersing the sheep
under their owner’s vociferous bidding; it is quite another thing to
see them gorging ravenously on a carrion sheep, and slinking off with
wolfish demeanour when disturbed. Historians may tell us that “the
last wolf” was killed among these mountains some centuries back; but
we make bold to doubt that assertion when surrounded by half a dozen
bristling “Gelerts” in the wilds of Wales, for it would then seem
that not a little of the character of _canis lupus_ has survived in
domestication. For my part, I would rather meet a Welsh bull on an
open grass-slope than a pack of these snarling sheep-dogs when their
master is out of call, for I can bear witness that at such a moment
Mr. Jack London’s choicest wolf-stories are brought too forcibly to
mind, and that “the call of the wild” has an unpleasant reality of its
own. The traveller who has been followed halfway up Carnedd Llewelyn
by a troop of these “white-fangs,” in an interval of their duties at
the sheep-washing in Llyn Llugwy, will be able to form at least an
“intelligent anticipation” of how it feels to be pursued by real wolves
in the forests of the north-west. The mountain sheep-dog is still half
a wolf, and not without reason has Mr. Thompson Seton made sheep-dogs
the heroes of two of the chapters of his _Wild Animals I have Known_.

I have incidentally mentioned the bull; and who that has walked much in
Carnarvonshire or Merioneth will be so pedantic as to deny the bull his
place among the _fauna_ of these districts? Theoretically, no doubt, he
must be classed with the domestic; but in practice there are times when
his domesticity is apt to be doubted by the wayfarer, and when even
the cheery assurances of the Welsh herdsman (if within hail) that “she
will do nothing to you,” leave much to be desired. Turned out in early
summer on the roadways and hill-slopes, with that national disregard
for Saxon weaknesses which has characterized the Cymry from of old,
the black bulls of these hilly regions are an element that has to be
taken into account, together with winds and waters, in the traveller’s
plan of campaign. I have known a party of tourists compelled to elect
between meeting the angry animal or relinquishing the direct ascent--a
choice between bull and “bwlch”--and unanimously agreed in favour of
a rearward move. I once camped with a friend for a fortnight in an
artist’s van, pitched on an open plot in an upland valley where a big
bull was pastured; and when we heard him in the darkness playfully
scratching back or sharpening horns on our door-step, we bethought
us of those weird stories of wild life in the backwoods, where the
dwellers in the lonely log-hut hear the long-drawn sniff of the
strolling bear, as he “samples” them under their bolted door at night.

In some of the valleys round Snowdon there is a strange-looking breed
of black and white Scandinavian cattle, whose appearance at close
quarters on a dark night is rather eerie, because only the white part
of each animal is easily visible, and the traveller has the spectacle
of a detached head, or shoulder, or hind-quarter, as the case may be,
confronting him through the gloom.

As a rule, it is only in spells of great heat, such as occasionally
descend upon the mountains, that the bulls are really dangerous, and
then they are seldom approached, even by the herdsman, without the
aid of dogs. It is said that the most ominous symptom on the bull’s
part is when, instead of the usual shrill bellow, he gives vent to
a low querulous grumbling sound, which seems to imply a deeply felt
long-cherished grievance; at such times it is wise to give him a wide
berth. After all, can we men complain, if the bull sometimes shows
himself dissatisfied with our treatment of his fellows? Who knows
but that his splenetic outbursts have some reference to the massacre
of his kith and kin at the hands of the “family butcher,” or to the
savage dietetic habits of the very people who denounce _him_ as “the
savage brute”? What I have thought a little hard, however, is that no
discrimination is made by the bull between beef-eater and vegetarian,
and that the peaceful pilgrim who has not tasted sirloin for over forty
years is compelled to skulk up the hill under cover of a stone wall
as guiltily as the shameless intruder who has a beef-sandwich in his
pocket. Some vegetarians, I believe, advocate the wearing of a badge;
there would be more to be said in favour of the distinction, if the
black bulls of Snowdonia would consent to recognize such flag of truce.

We see, then, that the Cambrian and Cumbrian hills, though far less
richly populated than they were some centuries back, have yet no
little interest to offer us in the races of non-human peoples, wild or
half-wild, that inhabit them--races whose life is much more closely
intertwined with the life of the mountain itself, and more responsive
to its varying moods and seasons, than that of the shepherd born and
bred on its slopes, not to speak of the summer visitor who comes there
for mere pastime or recreation.




VI

The Barren Hillside


We talk of the barrenness of the mountains, and barren in a sense
they are, when contrasted with the teeming wealth of the plain, yet
the bleakest of them, if studied with sympathy and insight, will be
found to have a living and life-giving freshness of its own. Now and
then, perhaps, when face to face with some scene of more than common
severity, we are tempted to exclaim, with Scott:

    The wildest glen, but this, can show
    Some touch of nature’s genial glow:
    On high Benmore green mosses grow,
    And heath-bells bud in deep Glencoe,
      And copse on Cruchan-Ben;
    But here, above, around, below,
      On mountain or in glen,
    Nor tree, nor shrub, nor plant, nor flower,
    Nor aught of vegetative power,
      The weary eye may ken.

But austereness, too, has its place, and often is to the mountains what
fertility is to the fields, not a blemish, but a glory; and if grey
crag[19] and wild hillside bear no visible fruitage, yet many are the
spiritual crops which may be gathered from them by the understanding
eye and mind.

Some centuries ago the Lake District, as Wordsworth has remarked, “must
have been covered with wood to a great height up the mountains, where
native Scotch firs must have grown in great profusion, as they do in
the northern part of Scotland to this day”; and he quotes a traditional
saying that a squirrel might have travelled from Wythburn to Keswick
without touching earth. In Wales the same conditions once existed,
and Pennant, in 1773, referred to the earlier destruction of the oak
forests which had clothed the upper dales. “Avarice,” he wrote, “or
dissipation, and its constant follower, poverty, have despoiled much
of our Principality of its leafy beauties.” We can no longer say of
Snowdon or of Helvellyn, as of Mont Blanc, that “around his waist are
forests braced”--even miniature forests--but a closer knowledge will
teach us that the hillside, even when barren of vegetation, is never
barren of charm, and it may be that these mountains have gained as much
as they have lost by the change. Certainly there is a keen pleasure to
the climber in standing free of all entanglement of trunk or thicket on
the bare and open fells.

Not that the mountain is often a mere treeless and shrubless
waste, for in some places, on the lower slopes, there is a thick
ground-growth--carefully shunned by the traveller, but rich and
beautiful in itself--of heather, bracken, and bilberry, and there are
not a few spots where the flanks of the hills are a very wilderness of
intermingled crags and brushwood, ancient lurking-place of “mart” or
fox, but rarely if ever trodden by foot of man. When these fail, there
may often be seen a line of stunted yews, or hollies, or junipers,
straggling up the slope, or a mountain-ash jutting out slantwise from
the side of some narrow ravine and almost bridging the watercourse. The
bilberry, like the heather, is at times found growing at great heights,
especially in the rockier and less accessible places, such as the
sides of Tryfan or Scafell Pike, where it flourishes amazingly in some
seasons and produces berries of giant size.[20]

Not less delightful is that close-fitting vestment of the hills, which
follows so faithfully each ripe curve and contour, and so trimly
encircles the projecting bosses of rock--the short crisp sward, on
which the mountain sheep have their pasture. Even the stoniest tracts
are softened, here and there, by these verdant interspaces, and it is
refreshing to see a steep saddle of turf flung across a craggy ridge,
or a streak of greenery running far down, like a path, among the grey
and pathless screes. These grass banks are in parts notched and graded
into a kind of natural stair, easy to climb and luxurious to descend;
elsewhere they have a smooth and glassy surface which in dry weather
becomes highly polished and rather treacherous to the feet.

Very inviting, too, are the narrow winding tracks, models of skilful
engineering, which sheep and shepherds between them have worn along
the slopes--slender thoroughfares which often skirt the fells for
some distance at the same level, and offer a less toilsome footing to
those whose course is round some projecting bluff or hollow combe. A
terrace-road, where one has a steep rise on one side and a steep drop
on the other, is always a delight, even when one’s terrace is but a
tiny sheep-path of a few inches’ width; nor is there any need to go
to show places, such as the so-called “Precipice Walk” at Dolgelly,
for a sensation which can be enjoyed in abundance on any unfrequented
hillside.

But let it be supposed that verdure of any kind is lacking, and that
we stand face to face with an expanse of bare cliff and scree--such
as the south face of the Great Gable--the solid cliffs rising above,
and the broken screes streaming downward and outward from their base.
Here is barrenness indeed, yet a barrenness which, to the lover of such
solitudes, is more fruitful than the choicest vineyard or cornfield.
For how weird and suggestive is this stationary rock-fall of screes,
this stony glacier arrested in its flow, yet retaining in its stillness
something of the undulant shape! Viewed from across the glen, it
looks like a great “tongue” of rocks lolling out from the mouth of
the gorge many hundreds of feet above, and gradually widening in its
fall; at closer quarters, it presents itself as a tolerably compact
mass of individual boulders, none of any great size, across which
it is necessary to pick one’s way with some deftness, because, like
Wordsworth’s cloud, it “moveth altogether if it move at all,” and a
floundering step may set half the hillside creeping daleward.

It is centuries, no doubt, since these detached stones fell from their
holdings, and they are themselves for the most part weather-worn and
sun-stained like the parent crags, but they are still occasionally
reinforced by new outcasts, when some exposed layer of rock has become
disintegrated by winter frosts and rains; and then the story of the
latest landslip is written visibly for several years in the paler hue
of the screes and in the discordant rift in the escarpment. As a rule,
falling stones, so great a danger in the Alps, are rare among our
mountains; once or twice in a season, perhaps, you may see, or hear,
a big stone go thundering down the hillside when no human agency has
been at work.

I refer to human agency, because the mention of falling stones reminds
me of the now disused sport of crag-bowling. The rolling of stones
down mountain sides, still a recognized method of warfare among
hillsmen, has rightly been anathematized in this peaceful country since
rock-climbing became popular; but in the old days, when no one went on
the crags, it was a harmless and diverting practice. Thus Gilpin, in
his travels among the mountains of Cumberland, a hundred and thirty
years back, remarked how the native children amused themselves in this
manner; and Bingley, describing his ascent of Tryfan some half-century
later, observes: “We stood on a mere point, and on each side of us
was a precipice more deep than any I had before seen; we united our
strength, and rolled down it several huge pieces of rock.” Forty years
ago it was common to see guides and tourists assiduously engaged in
the sport, the process of which was somewhat as follows. Having first
selected a steep “scar,” or a grass slope, with a pool if possible at
the foot of it, and having made sure that neither man nor sheep was
in the line of fire, the party turned their attention to some “huge
stone,” as Wordsworth has it,

    Couched on the bald top of an eminence,

and expended such energy as they had to spare in detaching this rock
from its station, until it slowly toppled over, gathered fierce speed,
went smoking and crashing down the hillside, and buried itself with a
wild plunge in the waters. Such was the pastime, a sort of vicarious
glissade, and from my own bygone enjoyment of it I have been led to
hope that the famous “labours” of Sisyphus, who, according to the old
Greek legend, was condemned in Hades to roll a large block up a hill
only--only!--to see it roll down again, were not quite so cheerless a
form of punishment as poets have feigned. The self-imposed labours of
the tobogganist seem to belong to the same class.

But if any reader thinks that so dangerous a game as crag-bowling ought
not to receive even this faint retrospective approval, let me add, as a
warning, that I know one pilgrim who, for his former indulgence in it,
sometimes pays the penalty in dreams. He has loosened, maybe, from its
high parapet some monster of a rock, in weight and girth far exceeding
any upon which he ever laid waking hands, and no sooner has he launched
it on its mad career than he remembers with horror unspeakable that
there is a cottage in the glen below--even now he sees its chimneys as
the crag goes thundering towards it, and he awakes in remorseful agony
at the sickening thud upon the roof.

From the loose screes we turn naturally to the stone walls, where
some at least of the scattered blocks have found lodgment and
reconstruction. So familiar are these walls to us, and so closely
associated with the hillside itself, that they seem to be a natural
part of it, as the bridges of the valleys, and one would not willingly
miss them from the bare landscape. It is rather surprising, indeed,
to find De Quincey speaking of the “sad injury” done to the beauty
of a mountainous country by its stone walls; for to some of us the
stone wall has a more native charm in such districts than any quickset
hedgerow could have: it has often furnished us with a shelter in storm,
a shade in heat, a lunching and a siesta-place; we love it, too, as the
haunt of our mountain companions, the wheatear and the rock-ousel. The
scaling of a seven-foot wall, when the top stones have become insecure,
may present some difficulty to the novice, and it is then that he is
glad to find one of those convenient loop-holes or rather sheep-holes,
through which, after temporarily removing the door-stone, he may
insinuatingly worm himself. On some of the lower slopes, especially
among the foot-hills near the seacoast, these walls are often of
huge girth and solidity, and, being overgrown and intertwined with
numberless ivies, mosses, and lichens, have a rare and peculiar beauty;
but the increasing use of barbed wire, as an adjunct or substitute for
the walls, is yet another sign of the vandalism which in so many ways
is working havoc among the hills.

But of all the treasures of the hillside the brightest and purest are
its water springs, sources of those many Welsh “afons,” and English
“gills” and “becks,” whose beauty might convince the most hardened and
sceptical of town-dwellers that the Naiads were something more than a
dream. Follow one of these swift mountain rivers, such as the Cumbrian
Esk or the Cambrian Llugwy, or better still, perhaps, one of the lesser
and more headlong freshets, from its deep pools and rock-basins in the
lower valley to its birthplace under the heights, and you will marvel
at the prodigality of its charms--so deliciously do the waves come
dancing and singing down the slopes in a succession of hidden falls, no
two of which are alike, or in an open cascade of white foam, such as
often wins for such streams in the Lake District the name of “Sour Milk
Gill”; and at last, as the current dwindles, you will trace it to some
brimming tarn, or to its high fount in green mosses among the rocks, or
will possibly lose it underground, where it may be heard bubbling and
gurgling below the stones in its invisible cradle.

These becks, it must be remembered, unlike the turbid snow-fed torrents
of Switzerland, are as clear as crystal, so that in calm weather you
may see every pebble at the bottom of the pools, and the trout poised
with waving fins; but after a heavy rainfall, when the streams are in
“spate,” it is often no easy matter to ford them, for then the merest
runnels, across which you step to-day without hindrance, may to-morrow
be a raging flood. On the other hand, there are times, though much
less frequent, when the smaller streamlets are withered up under a
spell of summer heat, and their dry channels are useful only as a stone
staircase for the climber, who in such seasons may become acquainted,
as never before, with the feeling of thirst. I think the sorest
temptation I ever underwent, without succumbing to it, was when, on
my first visit to Scafell Pike with two fellow undergraduates, on a
burning August day, we found a jug of claret-cup left to keep cool, in
the spring above Esk Hause, by a party which had trustfully preceded
us to the summit. It must have been owing to some morally bracing
influence in the high mountain air that that cup was untouched by us:
had we been subjected to the same ordeal on the banks of the Cam, it
seems but too certain that not one drop could have been spared.

The mountain tarns, in which many of the becks have their origin, lie
for the most part in hidden recesses, unsuspected from below, under
the crowning heights, and mark the beginning of the last stage in the
ascent. It is rather curious that the older school of nature-lovers
should have felt themselves disposed to melancholy rather than
to joyfulness amid such scenes; even Wordsworth speaks of a “not
unpleasing sadness” as naturally induced by the sight of these pools,
and surmises that “the prospect of a body of pure water, unattended
with groves and other cheerful rural images by which fresh water is
usually accompanied, and unable to give furtherance to the meagre
vegetation around it, excites a sense of some repulsive power strongly
put forth.”[21] Here is a strange relic, in the mind of a great modern
poet, of the medieval sense of antagonism between man and nature: we
now think rather of these remote tarns as wells of life and healing, to
be repaired to by the pilgrim who needs refreshment and comfort in the
jostling conflict of mankind.

With the features which I have mentioned, the barren hillside is not
likely to lose its attractiveness for nature-lovers. A wilderness it
may be, but of a sort which brings to mind the rapt words of the poet--

    Oh, wilderness were paradise enow.




VII

Slag-Heap or Sanctuary?


Mountains have in all ages given asylum to free races. Has the time
come when a free race must give asylum to its mountains? If we are
to have any voice in the answer, the question is one which, in this
country at least, cannot much longer be set aside; for though the
encroachments of “civilization” on wild Nature have been more or less
discussed since the famous “Tours” of Thomas Pennant created the modern
tourist, and sent him roaming through the hills, the problem of how to
preserve our mountain scenery--if we wish to preserve it--has become
much more pressing with the great industrial development of the past
hundred years, and it is no exaggeration to say that if it is not
solved within the next half-century there may be no mountain scenery to
preserve.

It is not to be doubted that, as civilization advances, mountain
districts, like all other wild districts, must be gradually “opened
out,” and made to minister more fully to human wants; but, then, what
_are_ those wants, and how can they best be gratified? The man who
owned the goose that laid the golden eggs wanted golden eggs, but his
too hasty method of opening out the goose defeated the purpose he
had in view. In like manner, if we want to make our mountains more
serviceable to the people, we must think whether the methods which we
are at present adopting will conduce to that end. Look at the working
of these methods among the Cambrian and Cumbrian hills.

Snowdonia has long been a sufferer from foreign and native aggression.
It is said that Edward I, to celebrate his conquest of Wales, held “a
triumphal fair” on Snowdon, in open defiance of the national sentiment
by which this peak was held as holy as was Parnassus by the Greeks.
What is more surprising is that the Welsh themselves have in later
times so fully acquiesced in the defilement of their sacred mountain,
and that the present plight of Snowdon would seem to be a pride rather
than a shame to them; for all earlier outrages sink into nothingness
when compared with the work of the past fifty years. The copper-mines
in Cwm Dyli, which have been worked, and neglected, and worked again,
have greatly defaced the mountain, have poisoned the waters, and
submerged the islands of Llyn Llydaw, once the haunt of the sea-gull;
but it was not until the railway was built from Llanberis, and an hotel
placed on the summit, that irreparable harm was done by deforming the
natural shape of Y Wyddfa, the topmost peak, into a dull, blunted cone.

Take the case of the River Glaslyn, which flows from the heart of
Snowdon through Cwm Dyli and Nant Gwynant, till it finds its way by
the Pass of Aberglaslyn to the sea. Visitors are often invited to
admire the “power works,” erected a few years ago at the head of Nant
Gwynant, and other signs of enterprise; but from the nature-lover’s
point of view, there is a different tale to tell, for the glorious
waterfall, through which the stream dashed headlong from Cwm Dyli, has
been replaced by a line of hideous metal pipes, by which the whole
hillside is scarred. As for the far-famed Pass of Aberglaslyn, defaced
as it is by railway works and tunnellings, remorselessly begun and
then temporarily abandoned, its state can only be described as one of
stagnant devastation.

It is a curious fact, too, that this greed for exploiting the natural
scenery of Wales goes hand in hand with a complete neglect of such
legitimate and really useful means of utilizing the tourist-season as
the erection of signposts, and the maintenance of bridle-paths and
mountain-tracks, which, without disfiguring the scenery, are of great
service to walkers.

Such is the latter state of this Welsh mountain, of which it used
to be said that “whoever slept upon Snowdon would wake inspired.”
The inspiration which to-day awaits those who wake upon Y Wyddfa
is the sight of a hostel “standing where it ought not,” with the
usual appurtenances of civilization--post-office, railway-station,
refreshment-rooms, cigar-ends, urinals, hordes of trippers, to whom
the mountain means no more than the pier at Margate or the terrace at
Windsor--almost everything that is civilized except a police-station,
and who knows but even that may come? If there is still any “beauty
born of murmuring sound” among the dwellers on Snowdon, it must be born
of the slow-panting locomotive, or of the gurgling of whiskies in the
hotel. And the view? In clear weather, we are told, it embraces the
coast of Ireland. I have seen it embrace a line of “washing,” hung out
to dry on the edge of the Glaslyn precipice.

In Cumberland, thanks to the efforts of a few faithful defenders and
the powerful sentiment aroused by the Lake poets, there has been
much less desecration, and the recent attempts of vandalism on these
remaining strongholds of Nature have been mostly repulsed; indeed, it
might be thought that the immediate danger in this quarter comes in
part from overzealous friends, and that it is time a limit were put to
the well-meant but mischievous practice of building memorial tablets
in record either of personal associations or of fatal accidents. That
the guide-books should tell us how Scott’s “pilgrim of Nature” lost his
life on Helvellyn, and how Matthew Arnold took a meditative walk there,
is well enough; but to erect stones in memory of these events, and
marble crosses on the various spots where rash cragsmen have fallen,
seems rather indiscreet; for it is not fitting that a wild mountain
should be plastered, like a lecture-hall or a cemetery, with epitaphs
and inscriptions.

But it must not be supposed that Lakeland has not suffered even
as Wales has done, though in a less degree, from the ravages of
commercialism. Coniston is a sad proof of the contrary, where that once
beautiful mountain, the Old Man, has been so ruined by the copper-mines
that, as has been said of the gold-fields of Colorado, “the hills
have been flayed of all their grass and scalped of all their timber;
they are scarred and gashed and ulcerated all over from past mining
operations--so ferociously does little man scratch at the breasts of
his great calm mother when he thinks that jewels are there hidden.” I
was told by Ruskin, whose windows at Brantwood looked westward across
Coniston Water to the Old Man, that he thought the very sky above the
mountain-top was poisoned and clouded by the mines.

Take the case of Thirlmere, too, that once wild and winding tarn,
so narrow at the middle that it was spanned by a rustic bridge, but
now enlarged into a Manchester water-tank. It is true that in this
case--unlike the majority--a useful purpose was attained; but are we
to believe that the _general_ interests of the country are promoted by
such feats of engineering, by which Thirlmere was “improved” into what
we now see it--a formless sheet of water, with a large dam at its lower
end, some ornamental water-works on its banks, and a few submerged
homesteads below its waves? No wonder that the coachmen who ply between
Keswick and Grasmere are never weary of pointing out to the passengers
these triumphs of human skill. And now Haweswater is to suffer a like
fate.

The desecration of our mountains is but part of the widespread contempt
for natural scenery which may be seen from end to end of the land; but
it is among mountains, where Nature is at her wildest, that it strikes
us the most. From what filthy-mindedness comes the strange conviction
that a clear, swift stream is the right and proper receptacle for the
rubbish of human homes?[22] I know a Welsh village, the type, alas! of
many villages in Wales, and elsewhere, in which from the houses built
on the steep bank of a pure mountain torrent there dribbles down into
the river a tributary river of filth--dust, broken bottles, paper, old
boots, decaying vegetables, and all kinds of refuse--for thus it is
that the country-folk muse on the gifts of Nature,

    And pore upon the brook that babbles by.

Nor is it only on the natives of these districts that such reproach
must fall; for, unhappily the state of some of the well-known peaks and
gullies, both in Wales and Cumberland, proves that many visitors also
forget their duties to the hills. I have seen the famous Needle Gully,
on the south flank of the Gable, literally lined with sandwich-papers
and other mementos of climbing parties, whose members would be ashamed
to treat St. Paul’s or Westminster Abbey with the like disrespect; and
if the skilled cragsman can be guilty of such sacrilege, can we hope
that the ordinary tripper will be more reverent in his ways?

Such acts are at least indications of a barbaric mood in the public
mind, which, when expressed in the form of commercial enterprise, is
capable of wreaking more damage on the mountains than a waterspout or
an earthquake; and the question presents itself: Will this mood pass or
be abated before a fatal mischief is done? For bad as things are now,
there may be worse to follow. “Thank God,” said Thoreau, “they cannot
cut down the clouds.” But can they not? With aeroplanes once perfected,
will not the cloud, that “mountain o’er a mountain,” share the fate of
the hills? No mountain, assuredly, will escape. “As to the loftiest
peaks of the Andes and Himalayas,” said Reclus, “too high in the
regions of cold for man to go to their summits, the day will come when
he shall be able to reach them. Balloons have already carried him two
or three thousand yards high; other aeronauts will bear and deposit
him on Gaourisankar, as far as the ‘great diadem of the dazzling
heaven.’”

The danger lies not so much in the accessibility of cloud or mountain
as in the reckless and irreverent spirit of the man who attains them.
To soar to “the great diadem” is no harm; but if we turn the great
diadem into a great muck-heap, shall we be the gainers by our flight?

Nor is it only the mountains that are being ruined by man’s
brutishness; the extinction of the wild life of the mountains is also
threatened. It has to be remembered that these remote ranges are
almost the only haunt where certain rare animals can still, to some
extent, hold their own. Scarcely more than a hundred years ago the
eagle was breeding in Borrowdale, as it still breeds in parts of the
Scottish Highlands; and whether the present century shall witness the
extermination of the buzzard, the kite, the peregrine, the raven, and
other rare species, must depend partly on the protection afforded
them by law against the sporting naturalist or “collector,” mainly on
the preservation of the mountains themselves from the commercialists’
greed. Shall we ever have the wisdom to make each such district into
an asylum for bird and mountain alike? At present the lover of wild
Nature, himself somewhat of a _rara avis_, must be thankful for what is
spared in his time; but it is his duty to think of the future also, and
to avert, if he may do so, the ruin which he clearly foresees.

We come back, therefore, to the question whether we wish to hand on
these mountains to our descendants as mountains or as something else.
For if we allow our company-promoters to carve and tunnel the crags,
to enlarge and discolour the lakes, to poison the streams, and to
drive away the wild life from the hills, are we not once more killing
the goose that laid the golden eggs? These hills of ours are small as
compared with the great mountains of Europe, but they are as beautiful,
and they are unique, and once ruined they cannot by any ingenuity be
restored. It is true that Switzerland is employed in the same manner
in spoiling the Jungfrau and Mont Blanc, but it must be remembered
that Switzerland has a practically unlimited reserve of Alps, while
we have but few mountains to spoil.[23] At present they are still
something more than a playground for gymnasts, or a picnic-ground for
tourists; they are mountains, a piece of unsophisticated wild Nature in
our midst, and as such, their value, to those who know it, is beyond
words. Let them still be a playground and a picnic-ground by all means,
but under such conditions as will preserve their native features and
their higher character. One would think that a nation which can spend
thousands of millions on a foreign war might afford to become the owner
of its own mountains at home!

The pretence that there is something selfish and anti-democratic in
the desire to save our mountain scenery from destruction is absurd;
on the contrary, it is entirely owing to its devotion to the fetish
of “property” that the public has so long allowed these places to
be exploited for private gain, and has stood by in utter apathy and
indifference while a handful of speculators and traders have benefited
at the expense of the community. Nor do we give to our mountains even
that protection which other antiquities enjoy. What would be said if a
Bill were submitted and passed in Parliament to authorize some private
company to pull Westminster Abbey or Stonehenge to pieces and make a
profit out of the ruins? It is no exaggeration to say that the Society
for the Preservation of Ancient Monuments would have the whole nation
at its back in its resistance to such vandalism; yet a mountain such as
Snowdon is a far more ancient monument than Stonehenge or the Abbey,
and the vandalism which is now being successfully accomplished is of a
still more insensate kind.

It is a hollow fallacy, too, to suppose that it is “democratic” to
fill up and destroy the rare silences and solitary spaces that a land
may still possess, on the plea that they cannot be enjoyed by all.
They _can_ be enjoyed by all who are fitted to enjoy them, and the
benefits that result from such enjoyment are in the long-run shared by
all the nation alike. To make a railway to the top of a mountain such
as Snowdon, and then to argue that it is a blessing to the weakly folk
who could not otherwise get there, is to overlook the fact that it is
not to the cripples, but to the community, that the mountain belongs.
“Whatsoever,” says the communist Reclus, “may be the future of man, or
the aspect of the world which he may create for himself, solitude, in
that portion of Nature which is left free, will become more and more
necessary to those men who wish to obtain renewed vigour of thought,
far from the conflict of opinions and voices. If the beautiful spots
of the world should one day become a mere rendezvous for the worn and
weary, they who love to live in the open air will have nothing left
them but to take refuge in a bark on the midst of the waves.… Happily
the mountain will always contain the sweetest places of retreat for him
who flies from the beaten paths of fashion.”

Wherein, then, lies the remedy for the dangers which I have described?
Within recent years there has been much rejoicing over the rescue
of two or three estates in the Lake District, such as Catbells and
Gowbarrow, from the clutch of the speculator, and all honour is
certainly due to those by whom these victories were won; but it is
evident that large sums of money cannot for ever be raised by private
subscription to buy off the day of doom, and that while one favoured
tract is being thus protected, another less fortunate one is being
lost. We cannot save our mountains by these piecemeal purchases from
the harpies who threaten them; such methods are too troublesome, too
costly, too purely local to be successful in the main. There is only
one thorough solution of the problem, and that is to nationalize
such districts as Snowdonia, Lakeland, the Peak of Derbyshire, and
other public holiday-haunts, and so to preserve them for the use and
enjoyment of the people for all time. If parks, open spaces, railways,
tramways, water, and other public needs can be municipalized, why not
mountains? It is impossible to over-estimate the value of mountains
as a recreation-ground for soul and body, yet, while we are awaking
to the need of maintaining public rights in other directions, we are
allowing our mountains--in North Wales and elsewhere--to be sacrificed
to commercial selfishness. If Snowdon, for instance, had been purchased
by the public twenty years ago, the investment would have been a great
deal more profitable than those in which we usually engage; but while
we are willing to spend vast sums on grabbing other people’s territory,
we have not, of course, a penny to spare for the preservation of our
own.

What we need, in short, is the appointment of mountain
sanctuaries--highland parks, where the hills themselves, with the wild
animals and plants whose life is of the hills, shall be preserved in
their wildness as the cherished property of the people--consecrated
places, where every one shall be entitled to walk, to climb, to rest,
to meditate, to study Nature, to disport himself as he will, but
_not_ to injure or destroy. When we truly care for these hills of
ours, we shall remove them from the tender mercies of the mine-owners
and railway lords, who now seek profit in their disfigurement, and
shall place them under a council of mountaineers and naturalists and
nature lovers who understand and reverence them, with the instruction
that they shall so administer their charge as to add to the present
happiness and the permanent wealth of the nation. How long will it take
us, hag-ridden as we are by the nightmare of private ownership, to
awake to the necessity of such a change?

Pending that blessed time, I would point out to those public-spirited
rich men (and we know there are such) who are ever looking for some
useful outlet for their wealth, that here, in the shadow of this
storm-cloud that overhangs our mountain scenery, they have a golden
chance of ennobling themselves; for it is simple truth that the
millionaire who should buy a Snowdon, and make free gift of it to the
people, would be a benefactor for all time, and would far outstrip in
lasting philanthropy any donor of churches or charities, hospitals
or libraries, scholarships or seats of learning. For mountains are
the holiest ground that the heart of man has consecrated, and their
educating influence is even more potent than that of books; they are
the true authors, the standard works, printed in the most enduring
type, that cheer and brace, as no written words can do, the minds of
those who study them.

In what state, then, shall we hand on to those who follow us these
sacred temples of Nature, which, as even so old-fashioned a writer as
Wordsworth asserted, are “a sort of national property, in which every
man has a right and interest who has an eye to perceive and a heart to
enjoy”? The day cannot be far distant when our choice must be made, and
it is between a sanctuary and a slag-heap that we must choose.

   _Printed in Great Britain by_ Butler & Tanner, _Frome and London_




FOOTNOTES


[1] _The Cambrian Sketch Book_, by R. R. Davies.

[2] _Rambles among the Mountains, Valleys, and Solitudes of Wales_, by
J. H. Cliffe, 1860.

[3] “The simple people who till the soil of Westmorland and Cumberland
cannot view in any other light than that of childish ‘laking’ the
migrating propensities of all the great people of the south who
annually come up like shoals of herrings from their own fertile
pastures to the rocky grounds of the north.”--_De Quincey._

[4] The very word “to climb” is beginning to be appropriated by
the gymnasts, in whose records we find mention of meetings with
“non-climbing parties” at the summits. Scott’s verse, “I climbed the
dark brow of the mighty Helvellyn,” will evidently have to be rewritten.

[5] See the well-known lines in Scott’s “Helvellyn”:

    “Dark green was that spot mid the brown mountain-heather,
    Where the Pilgrim of Nature lay stretched in decay.”

[6] Dr. G. A. Selwyn, then Bishop of Lichfield.

[7] “I suppose that I feel the same awe when on their summits that many
do on entering a church. To see what kind of earth that is on which you
have a house and garden somewhere, perchance! It is equal to a lapse
of many years. If you have been to the top of Mount Washington, let
me ask, what did you find there? Going up there and being blown on is
nothing. We never do much climbing while we are there, but we eat our
luncheon, etc., very much as at home. It is after we get home that we
really go over the mountain, if ever. What did the mountain say? What
did the mountain do?”--_Thoreau._

[8] Captain Cameron, of Glen Brittle House, Isle of Skye.

[9] The expression was used in E. D. Clarke’s _Tour through Wales_,
1791.

[10] The word “glidder” is given in the _English Dialect Dictionary_
as meaning a loose stone. Cf. the line in Scott’s “Shepherd’s Tale”:
“Among the glidders grey.”

[11] “I ken the place, as mony does, in fair daylight, but how to find
it by moonshine, amang sae mony crags and stanes, as like to each
other as the collier to the deil, is mair than I can tell.”--_Heart of
Midlothian._

[12] A proof of the sentiment attaching to Snowdon may be found in the
number of counties which claim to have a distant view of it from their
own highest points; we are told, for example, that it can be seen from
the Worcestershire Beacon, at Malvern, across nearly a hundred miles
of hill and plain. From what I have been able to discern of the Welsh
heights as viewed from the hills of Shropshire, at a range of about
fifty or sixty miles, I suspect that “Snowdon” must often be understood
as a generic term, and that outlying summits such as the Arenig Fawr,
near Bala, sometimes do duty for their chief.

[13] _Description of the Scenery of the Lakes_, 1823.

[14] W. Gilpin, 1786.

[15] See _Climbing in the British Isles_, by W. P. Haskett Smith, i. 86.

[16] Cf. the name of the well-known Nant Ffrancon, meaning “the Valley
of the Beavers.”

[17] W. Gilpin’s _Observations on the Mountains of Cumberland_, 1786.

[18] See an interesting article on “Wild Goats in Wales,” in _Country
Life Illustrated_, March 2, 1901. Also Mr. J. G. Millais’ _British
Mammals_, iii. 213.

[19] “Probably these crests of the earth are for the most part of
one colour in all lands, that grey colour of antiquity which Nature
loves; colour of unpainted wood, weather-stain, time-stain; not
glaring nor gaudy; the colour of all roofs, the colour of things that
endure.”--Thoreau, _Journal_, x. 452.

[20] For a description of the flowers of the fells, I may be permitted,
to refer the reader to my book _The Call of the Wildflower_, which
contains chapters on the flora of Snowdonia and Helvellyn.

[21] _Description of the Scenery of the Lakes._

[22] In the good old days it must have been a practice to build privies
actually _over_ small streams, as may be seen from ruins near disused
cottages in Wales and Cumberland.

[23] There is an English branch of the League for the Preservation of
Swiss Scenery, which has powerful support. Does not charity in this, as
in other matters, begin at home?





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of On Cambrian and Cumbrian Hills, by 
Henry Stephens Salt

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ON CAMBRIAN AND CUMBRIAN HILLS ***

***** This file should be named 48700-0.txt or 48700-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/8/7/0/48700/

Produced by Jan-Fabian Humann and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Stag Cook Book, by Carroll Mac Sheridan

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Stag Cook Book
       Written for Men by Men

Author: Carroll Mac Sheridan

Release Date: April 13, 2015 [EBook #48695]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STAG COOK BOOK ***




Produced by Emmy and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from
images generously made available by The Internet Archive)










_The Stag Cook Book_

_C. MAC SHERIDAN_




THE STAG COOK BOOK

    _WRITTEN FOR MEN BY MEN_

    COLLECTED AND EDITED

    _by_

    C. MAC SHERIDAN

    _With an Introduction by_
    ROBERT H. DAVIS

[Illustration]

    NEW YORK
    GEORGE H. DORAN COMPANY




    COPYRIGHT, 1922,
    BY GEORGE H. DORAN COMPANY


    THE STAG COOK BOOK, II

    PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA




_Dedicated To_—

THAT GREAT HOST OF BACHELORS AND BENEDICTS ALIKE


    who have at one time or another tried to “cook something”;
    and who, in the attempt, have weakened under a fire
    of feminine raillery and sarcasm, only to spoil what,
    under more favorable circumstances, would have proved a
    chef-d’œuvre.




    _“They may live without houses and live without books,”
      So the saying has gone through the ages,
    “But a civilized man cannot live without cooks—”
      It’s a libel, as proved by these pages!
    For when left by himself in a small kitchenette,
      With a saucepan, a spoon and a kettle,
    A man can make things that you’ll never forget—
      That will put any cook on her mettle._

    _Where camp fires glow through the still of the night,
      Where grills are electric and shiny,
    Where kitchens are huge, done in tiling of white,
      Where stoves are exceedingly tiny,
    Where people are hungry—no matter the place—
      A man can produce in a minute
    A dish to bring smiles to each skeptical face,
      With art—and real food value—in it!_

    _At range and at oven, at (whisper it!) still,
      A man is undoubtedly master;
    His cooking is done with an air and a skill,
      He’s sure as a woman—and faster!
    He may break the dishes and clutter the floor,
      And if he is praised—he deserves it—
    He may flaunt his prowess until he’s a bore....
      But, Boy, what he serves—when he serves it!_




INTRODUCTION

By ROBERT H. DAVIS


Cooking is a gift, not an art. Eating is an art, not a gift. In
combination a grace is developed. No great culinary triumph was ever
perfected by accident.

Charles Lamb’s essay on roast pig was responsible for a tidal wave
of burnt pork that swept over England in the nineteenth century.
Mr. Lamb led a hungry empire to the belief that only through an
act of incendiarism could a suckling porker be converted into a
delicacy; whereas, as a matter of fact, the perfection of roast pork,
golden-brown and unseared by fire, were possible only in the oven.

Lucullus, the good Roman gourmet, had his meals cooked in a mint.
He required that his masterpieces be served on gold and silver and
crystal, and spread on a table of lapis lazuli. The sauces compiled for
him were worth more than the food upon which they were poured. He was
the high priest of extravagance and luxury. A single meal stood him a
fortune. He had more regard for the cost than for the cooking. It is
said that his death was hastened by dyspepsia.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the early seventies a French nobleman, living in the neighborhood
of Barbizon, was found seated at the table with his face in a plate
of soup. Because of the fact that a butcher knife had been inserted
via the back between his fourth and fifth rib on the left side, he was
quite dead. Clues led nowhere. It became one of the mysteries.

Long afterward an old man tottered into the office of the Prefect and
announced that he wished to make a confession.

“Proceed,” said the official.

“’Twas I,” responded the ancient, “who delivered the death stroke to
the Duke de la —— thirty-five years ago.”

“What inspired you to make this confession?”

“Pride.”

“I do not comprehend. The details, if you please.”

“By profession I was a chef,” said the self-accused. “The Duke, at a
fabulous price, enticed me into his service. His first request was that
I make for him a perfect consomme. _Voilà!_ For three days I prepared
this perfection. With my own hand I placed before him the soup tureen.
With my own hand I ladled it out. He inhaled its divine essence; and
then, Your Honor, _he reached for the salt_. _Mon Dieu!_ I destroy him!”

The Prefect embraced the artist and took him out to lunch. Thus art
was vindicated and the incident closed. In the chemistry of cooking,
“enough is too much.”

       *       *       *       *       *

The immortals who have contributed recipes to this volume were born
with a silver spoon not in their mouths, but in their hands. The cap
and apron, not the cap and bells, is the garb in which they perform.
Secrets handed down through generations are thrown with a wanton hand
on the pages that comprise this volume. Sauces from the south, chowders
from New England, barbecued masterpieces from the west, grilled
classics from field and stream, ragouts, stews, desserts, dressings
are hung within reach of all, like garlic clusters from the rafters of
opportunity. Reach up and help yourself.

Be not disturbed by occasional jocund phrases in this symposium. Behind
them is probably concealed a savory or a flavor. A long paragraph
may conclude with full particulars concerning the architecture of a
gastronomic dream. Turn the pages slowly lest you be overwhelmed by the
richness of the menu.

       *       *       *       *       *

The late King Edward, upon bidding the later Carlos of Portugal
God-speed back to his native shores, inquired: “By what were you most
impressed during your visit to the British Isles?”

“Roast beef,” said Carlos, expanding in ecstasy.

“And what else?” inquired Edward.

“Well,” said Carlos, “the boiled beef wasn’t so damned bad.”

       *       *       *       *       *

It is one thing to cook food, and another to consume it. This inspired
tome is the product of cooks who are not afraid to take their own
medicine. The names of many of the dishes catalogued herein lies on the
tongues of the mob, but the delicacies themselves do not. This book
brings within the reach of all opportunities that up to now have been
denied them. Given a first class stove, a few simple ingredients and a
copy of this book, hunger can be abolished wherever English is read.

       *       *       *       *       *

Rossini, the musician, also a chef, after writing the score of _The
Barber of Seville_, was informed by the director that a prelude
was required immediately. Rossini repaired to his kitchen, cooked
himself a perfect dinner, consumed it alone, and went to bed where
in a reclining position with score sheets all about him, he wrote a
brilliant introduction to his brilliant opera. Suddenly a gust of wind
entered unbidden at the window and scattered the precious sheets about
the room. Several disappeared through the lattice. Rossini, heavy
with the consequences of his culinary genius, re-wrote a fresher and
better prelude, tucked it under his corpulent person and rolled over
for a final nap, after which he hastened to the opera house with his
masterpiece. His best work was done on a full stomach.

       *       *       *       *       *

Brillat-Savarin, author of “Gastronomy as a Fine Art,” rather
whimsically names “Gasteria” the tenth and fairest of the Muses. The
writers of this book name her as the first.

                                                         R. H. D.




CONTENTS


    _PART ONE: CONTRIBUTORS_

                                                              PAGE
           I _Meredith Nicholson_                               31
               WABASH VALLEY STEAK

          II _Rex Beach_                                        34
               ONION CLAM CHOWDER

         III _Hudson Maxim_                                     35
               SPAGHETTI

          IV _Warren G. Harding_                                36
               WAFFLES

           V _Ellis Parker Butler_                              31
               BOUILLABAISSE JOE TILDEN

          VI _Jules J. Jusserand_                               38
               RADISH SALAD

         VII _Bruce Barton_                                     39
               RICE PUDDING

        VIII _Richard Bennett_                                  40
               LIEDERKRANZ Á LA HOOSIER

          IX _Walt Louderback_                                  41
               CORN CHOWDER

           X _Captain Robert A. Bartlett, U.S.A._               42
               COD FISH

          XI _George F. Worts_                                  43
               SWEET POTATO PONE

         XII _Gelett Burgess_                                   45
               PANDOWDY

        XIII _William Allen White_                              46
               VEGETABLE SALAD

         XIV _Irvin S. Cobb_                                    48
               HOG JOWL AND TURNIP GREENS (PADUCAH STYLE)

          XV _Richard Walton Tully_                             49
               HAWAIIAN CROQUETTES Á LA “THE BIRD OF PARADISE”

         XVI _William Johnston_                                 51
               OYSTERS PECHEUR

        XVII _Dr. Charles M. Sheldon_                           52
               LIKES BREAD AND MILK

       XVIII _James Montgomery Flagg_                           53
               “JAMES MONTGOMERY SUDS”

         XIX _Roy L. McCardell_                                 54
               “EGGS MUSHROOMETTE”

          XX _Judge Ben B. Lindsey_                             56
               BRAN MUFFINS

         XXI _Otis Skinner_                                     57
               ARTICHOKES, MISTER ANTONIO

        XXII _Dan Beard_                                        58
               A BURGOO

       XXIII _De Wolf Hopper_                                   60
               RASPBERRY SHORTCAKE

        XXIV _Chick Evans_                                      61
               TOMATO SOUP

         XXV _Joshua A. Hatfield_                               63
               EGGPLANT SAUTÉ Á L’ALEXANDER
               POTATO STICKS ALEXANDER
               COLD SAUCE ALEXANDER
               SUPRÊME OF CHICKEN Á L’ALEXANDER
               GARNITURE
               FONDU AU FROMAGE Á L’ALEXANDER
               POACHED EGGS EN CROUSTADE Á L’ALEXANDER
               ROMAINE SALAD Á L’ALEXANDER
               ROGNONS DE VEAU Á L’ALEXANDER
               STRAWBERRY TARTLETS ALEXANDER
               BAKED OYSTERS ALEXANDER
               ÉMINCE OF CHICKEN Á L’ALEXANDER

        XXVI _Stewart Edward White_                             69
               MULLIGAN

       XXVII _Oliver Herford_                                   70
               FRIED ELDERBERRY BLOSSOMS

      XXVIII _Reed Smoot_                                       71
               PEACH COBBLER

        XXIX _Ray Long_                                         72
               SHAD ROE
               DESSERT

         XXX _Kenneth C. Beaton_                                73
               LOBSTER

        XXXI _John Harvey Kellogg, M. D._                       75
               MACARONI WITH CHEESE
               SAVORY POTATOES

       XXXII _Clare Briggs_                                     77
               WAFFLES

      XXXIII _Edward W. Bok_                                    78
               ASPARAGUS

       XXXIV _Charles Hanson Towne_                             80
               CORN PUDDING

        XXXV _Jerome D. Kern_                                   81
               TERRAPIN

       XXXVI _Daniel Willard_                                   82
               COTTAGE PUDDING
               STRAWBERRY SAUCE

      XXXVII _Houdini_                                          83
               SCALLOPED MUSHROOMS AND DEVILED EGGS
               THE MUSHROOM DISH
               THE EGGS

     XXXVIII _Charles P. Steinmetz_                             84
               MEAT LOAF

       XXXIX _Charlie Chaplin_                                  86
               STEAK AND KIDNEY PIE

          XL _Dr. Frank Crane_                                  87
               ROUND STEAK

         XLI _Robert H. Davis_                                  89
               CREAM SAUCE Á LA WORCESTERSHIRE

        XLII _John A. Dix_                                      90
               FRIED TROUT

       XLIII _Guy Bates Post_                                   91
               LAMB CURRY Á LA “OMAR, THE TENTMAKER”

        XLIV _Dr. Don Rafael H. Elizalde_                       93
               SANCOCHO
               YAPINGACHO

         XLV _Bide Dudley_                                      95
               TOMATO SOP

        XLVI _William Hale Thompson_                            96
               ROAST BEEF

       XLVII _Booth Tarkington_                                 97
               CORN FLAKES

      XLVIII _T. A. Dorgan_                                     98
               CHILÏ CON CARNE

        XLIX _William de Leftwich Dodge_                        99
               RAGOUT DE MOUTON

           L _Montague Glass_                                  100
               BOUILLABAISSE

          LI _John Philip Sousa_                               103
               PELOTAS Á LA PORTUGUESE
               SPAGHETTI

         LII _Will Hays_                                       105
               CHICKEN PILAU

        LIII _Frank Ward O’Malley_                             106
               RUM-TUM-TIDDY

         LIV _Charles Evans Hughes_                            108
               CORN BREAD

          LV _Walter Prichard Eaton_                           109
               MINCE PIE
               THE FILLING

         LVI _W. T. Benda_                                     113
               POLISH SPECIALTIES
               BARSHCK WITH USHKA
               USHKA
               BURACHKI

        LVII _Captain Edward A. Salisbury_                     118
               SAUCE FOR SPAGHETTI
               EGGS Á LA SALISBURY
               FISH Á LA COMMODORE
               TO COOK TROUT
               VENISON STEAK
               GOOSE
               A MAYONNAISE AND A SALAD DRESSING
               DUCKS AND LARGE FOWL
               TEAL, PARTRIDGE AND SMALL FOWL
               BEANS
               ITALIAN RICE
               STEAK SAUCE

       LVIII _Thomas H. Ince_                                  126
               CHICKEN HALIBUT
               ONION SOUP AU GRATIN
               RICE Á LA MANHATTAN

         LIX _George Ade_                                      128
               “SCOLLOPED” OYSTERS

          LX _Lyman Abbott_                                    130
               DEEP APPLE PIE

         LXI _Terry Ramsaye_                                   131
               LETTUCE (Á LA RED CREEK)

        LXII _R. L. (Rube) Goldberg_                           133
               HASH

       LXIII _Channing Pollock_                                134
               CORN BREAD

        LXIV _Hussein Kahn Alai_                               135
               CHIRIN POLOW

         LXV _William J. Bryan_                                138
               FRENCH-FRIED ONIONS

        LXVI _Will Irwin_                                      139
               HAM AND EGGS

       LXVII _Douglas Fairbanks_                               140
               BREAD TART

      LXVIII _Julian Street_                                   141
               SOLE Á LA MARGUERY AND DUCK WITH ORANGES
               SOLE Á LA MARGUERY
               DUCK BIGARADE

        LXIX _S. S. McClure_                                   143
               OMELETTE—AND PIE

         LXX _Basil King_                                      145
               LOBSTER Á LA KING

        LXXI _John A. Moroso_                                  146
               SPAGHETTI-FOR-THE-GANG

       LXXII _F. X. Leyendecker_                               148
               VEAU SAUTÉ MARENGO
               VOL AU VENT FINANCIÉRE

      LXXIII _Eddie Cantor_                                    150
               BOILED BEEF AND HORSERADISH SAUCE

       LXXIV _Frazier Hunt_                                    151
               STUFFED CELERY

        LXXV _Wm. Slavins McNutt_                              152
               ORANGE COMPOTE

       LXXVI _Stephen Vincent Benet_                           154
               ZITELLI’S MACARONI STEW

      LXXVII _James R. Quirk_                                  155
               TOMATO WIGGLE

     LXXVIII _Charles W. Eliot_                                156
               A FAVORITE MENU

       LXXIX _H. S. Cumming_                                   158
               VIRGINIA EGG BREAD

        LXXX _Joseph Santley_                                  159
               COCOA CREAM CAKE

       LXXXI _A. Hamilton Gibbs_                               160
               SQUAB EN CASSEROLE

      LXXXII _Richard Barthelmess_                             161
               SPICED GRAPES

     LXXXIII _Don Juan R. y Gayangos_                          162
               EGG PLANT AU GRATIN

      LXXXIV _Samuel G. Blythe_                                163
               TRIPE Á LA MODE DE CAEN Á LA ROY CARRUTHERS

       LXXXV _Charles H. Taylor_                               165
               CLAM CHOWDER

      LXXXVI _Cyrus H. K. Curtis_                              167
               BAKED BEANS

     LXXXVII _Frederic Arnold Kummer_                          169
               SPAGHETTI DIABOLIQUE

    LXXXVIII _Albert D. Lasker_                                170
               CHICKEN PAPRIKA

      LXXXIX _Henry Van Dyke_                                  171
               FISH CHOWDER

          XC _Macklyn Arbuckle_                                172
               SOUTHERN GUMBO Á LA “COUNTY CHAIRMAN”

         XCI _John Taintor Foote_                              174
               MORELS SAUTÉ

        XCII _Maurice Francis Egan_                            176
               A DIPLOMATIST’S RECEIPT FOR WELSH RABBIT

       XCIII _Livingston Farrand_                              178
               SAUSAGE AND GRIDDLE CAKES

        XCIV _F. Ziegfeld, Jr._                                179
               LITTLE CHICKEN TARTS

         XCV _Harold Lloyd_                                    181
               LEMON LAYER CAKE

        XCVI _Luther Burbank_                                  183
               TURKEY Á LA BURBANK

       XCVII _Raymond McKee_                                   185
               TO COOK RABBITS

      XCVIII _Will Deming_                                     187
               VIRGINIA HAM
               LEMON PIE
               A DRESSING

        XCIX _Charles W. Chessar_                              189
               TIPS ON STEAKS

           C _Arthur T. Vance_                                 191
               SALADE Á LA TURC
               PANDORA FRENCH DRESSING
               WELSH RABBIT Á LA MORGAN ROBERTSON

          CI _Baron de Cartier_                                195
               WATERZOIE DE VOLAILLE

         CII _Dean Cornwell_                                   197
               SPAGHETTI-MY-STYLE


PART TWO: RECIPES

    BREADS—MUFFINS—WAFFLES—ETC.
      BRAN MUFFINS                                              56
      BREAD AND MILK                                            52
      CORN BREAD                                          108, 134
      CORNFLAKES                                                97
      GRIDDLE CAKES                                            178
      SWEET POTATO PONE                                         43
      VIRGINIA EGG BREAD                                       158
      WAFFLES                                               36, 77

    EGG DISHES
      DEVILED EGGS                                              83
      EGGS Á LA SALISBURY                                      119
      EGGS “MUSHROOMETTE”                                       54
      EGGS USED WITH ASPARAGUS                                  79
      HAM AND EGGS                                             139
      OMELETTE                                                 143
      POACHED EGGS EN CROUSTADE A L’ALEXANDER                   65


    SOUPS—MULLIGANS—BOUILLABAISSE
      BARSHCK                                                  113
      BARSHCK WITH USHKA                                       113
      BEAN SOUP                                                124
      BURGOO, A                                                 58
      BOUILLABAISSE JOE TILDEN                                  37
      BOUILLABAISSE                                            100
      CORN CHOWDER                                              41
      CLAM CHOWDER                                             165
      FISH CHOWDER                                             171
      MULLIGAN                                                  69
      ONION CLAM CHOWDER                                        34
      ONION SOUP AU GRATIN                                     126
      SANCOCHO                                                  93
      TOMATO SOUP                                               61
      WATERZOIE DE VOLAILLE                                    195


    FISH—OYSTERS—LOBSTER—ROE—ETC.
      BAKED OYSTERS ALEXANDER                                   67
      CHICKEN HALIBUT                                          126
      COD FISH                                                  42
      COLD SAUCE ALEXANDER (FOR COLD SALMON)                    64
      FISH Á LA COMMODORE                                      119
      FRIED TROUT                                               90
      HAWAIIAN CROQUETTES Á LA BIRD OF PARADISE                 49
      LOBSTER Á LA KING                                        145
      LOBSTER (K C B)                                           73
      OYSTERS PECHEUR                                           51
      “SCOLLOPED” OYSTERS                                      128
      SHAD ROE                                                  72
      SOLE Á LA MARGUERY                                       141
      STEAMED CLAMS                                             97
      TROUT, TO COOK                                           120


    FOWL (DOMESTIC AND WILD)
      CHICKEN PAPRIKA                                          170
      CHICKEN PILAU                                            105
      CHIRIN POLOW (PERSIAN)                                   135
      DUCK BIGARADE                                            142
      DUCKS AND LARGE FOWL                                     122
      ÉMINCE OF CHICKEN Á L’ALEXANDER                           68
      GOOSE, THE BEST WAY TO COOK                              121
      LITTLE CHICKEN TARTS                                     179
      SOUTHERN GUMBO Á LA “COUNTY CHAIRMAN”                    172
      SQUAB EN CASSEROLE                                       160
      SUPRÊME OF CHICKEN Á L’ALEXANDER                          64
      SUPRÊME OF CHICKEN Á L’ALEXANDER GARNITURE                65
      TEAL, PARTRIDGE AND SMALL FOWL                           123
      TURKEY Á LA BURBANK                                      183


    MEATS—MEAT DISHES AND SAUCES

      CHILI CON CARNE                                           98
      CREAM SAUCE Á LA WORCESTERSHIRE                           89
      HASH—A NEW METHOD                                        133
      HAM AND EGGS                                             139
      HOG JOWL AND TURNIP GREENS                                48
      HORSERADISH SAUCE                                        150
      LAMB CURRY Á LA “OMAR THE TENT MAKER”                     91
      MEAT LOAF                                                 84
      PELOTAS Á LA PORTUGUESE                                  103
      RABBIT, TO COOK                                          185
      RAGOUT DE MOUTON                                          99
      ROAST BEEF, TIPS ON COOKING                               96
      ROGNONS DE VEAU Á L’ALEXANDER                             66
      ROUND STEAK—REALLY DELICIOUS                              87
      SANCOCHO (FROM ECUADOR)                                   93
      SPICED GRAPES                                            161
      STEAK AND KIDNEY PIE                                      86
      STEAK SAUCE                                              125
      STEAK, TIPS ON                                           189
      TERRAPIN                                                  81
      TRIPE Á LA MODE DE CAEN                                  163
      USHKA (POLISH)                                           114
      VEAU SAUTÉ MARENGO                                       148
      VOL AU VENT FINANCIÈRE                                   149
      VENISON STEAK                                            120
      VIRGINIA HAM                                              31
      WABASH VALLEY STEAK                                      187


    VEGETABLES AND THE LIKE

      ARTICHOKES MISTER ANTONIO                                 57
      ASPARAGUS                                                 78
      BEANS (VARIOUS STYLES)                              123, 167
      BURACHKI (POLISH)                                        117
      EGGPLANT AU GRATIN                                       162
      EGGPLANT SAUTÉ Á L’ALEXANDER                              63
      FRENCH FRIED ONIONS                                      138
      ITALIAN RICE                                             124
      MORELS SAUTÉ                                             174
      POTATO STICKS ALEXANDER                                   63
      RICE Á LA MANHATTAN                                      127
      SAVORY POTATOES                                           75
      “SCOLLOPED” MUSHROOMS                                     83
      TOMATO SOP                                                95
      TURNIP GREENS                                             48
      YAPINGACHO (FROM ECUADOR)                                 94


    SPAGHETTI—MACARONI—ETC.
      MACARONI STEW, ZITELLI’S                                 154
      MACARONI WITH CHEESE                                      75
      SPAGHETTI                                                 35
      SPAGHETTI DIABOLIQUE                                     169
      SPAGHETTI FOR-THE-GANG                                   146
      SPAGHETTI-MY-STYLE                                       197
      SPAGHETTI SAUCES                               118, 146, 154
      SPAGHETTI WITH PELOTAS                                   103


    SALADS AND SALAD DRESSINGS
      DRESSING (FOR STUFFED TOMATOES, COLD MEAT, POTATO SALAD) 188
      LETTUCE Á LA RED CREEK                                   131
      A MAYONNAISE AND A SALAD DRESSING                        122
      PANDORA FRENCH DRESSING                                  192
      RADISH SALAD                                              38
      ROMAINE SALAD Á L’ALEXANDER                               66
      SALADE Á LA TURC                                         191
      VEGETABLE SALAD                                           46


    DESSERTS—CAKES—PIES—PUDDINGS

      BREAD TARTS                                              140
      COCOA CREAM CAKE                                         159
      CORN PUDDING                                              80
      COTTAGE PUDDING WITH STRAWBERRY SAUCE                     82
      DEEP APPLE PIE                                           130
      DESSERT, A                                                72
      FRIED ELDERBERRY BLOSSOMS                                 70
      INDIAN PUDDING                                           156
      JAMES MONTGOMERY SUDS                                     53
      LEMON LAYER CAKE                                         181
      LEMON PIE                                                187
      MINCE-PIE                                                109
      ORANGE COMPOTE                                           152
      PEACH COBBLER                                             71
      PANDOWDY                                                  45
      PIE                                                      143
      PIE CRUST                                           111, 144
      RASPBERRY SHORTCAKE                                       60
      RICE PUDDING                                              39
      STRAWBERRY TARTLETS ALEXANDER                             67


    CHEESE AND CHEESE DISHES
      CELERY STUFFED WITH CHEESE                               151
      FONDU AU FROMAGE Á L’ALEXANDER                            65
      LIEDERKRANZ Á LA HOOSIER                                  40
      RUM-TUM-TIDDY                                            106
      TOMATO WIGGLE                                            155
      WELSH RABBIT (A DIPLOMATIST’S RECIPE)                    176
      WELSH RABBIT Á LA MORGAN ROBERTSON                       193




THE STAG COOK BOOK




    “This dish of meat is too good for
     any but anglers, or very honest men.”
                               IZAAK WALTON.




I

_Meredith Nicholson_


WABASH VALLEY STEAK

No man can be a hero in his own kitchen. No man with the slightest
regard for domestic peace will ever permit his wife to see him cook
without having outsiders present. The psychology of this is obvious.
Impatient though a woman may be of her husband’s attempts to show that
he is a real sport and skilled in all the arts of social entertaining,
before guests she is likely to manifest a modest degree of pride in his
performances. Or even if slightly contemptuous she is moved to assume a
chaffing attitude that adds to the general good feeling. I beg not to
be confused with the type of bachelor club man who is a perfect wizard
with the chafing dish. I have always viewed those birds with suspicion.
Their tricks are few and easy of accomplishment—stunts with mushrooms,
or chicken à la king done nonchalantly in a dinner coat. I sing my
fiercest hymn of hate of those persons.

My own method is to assume full charge of an orderly kitchen, removing
coat and waistcoat, donning an apron and attacking the job without
apology or simper or the silly pretense that I’m not sure of the
result. Not sure! Except in the case of colored women cooks, who trust
to inspiration and achieve miracles without, seemingly, knowing how
they do ’em—except, I say, in such instances, cookery is an exact
science. If you follow a good rule and know how to regulate the range
and have a true eye and acute nose, failure is obliterated from the
lexicon.

And now for my scenario, which I stole from a lady, who in turn
stole it, I dare say, from some cook book. I might pretend that I
invented it, but I didn’t. All I claim is that it offers an Olympian
feast—particularly if you can accompany it with hot biscuits, which I
admit are beyond my powers.


_The Recipe_

Take a round steak cut two inches thick; and beat a cup of flour into
it. Heat a large skillet till it is piping hot with lard covering the
bottom about one inch. Put in the steak, cover immediately, and allow
it to cook about five minutes, turning once.

Then cover it with a sauce composed in this wise:

    Four large tomatoes
    Four onions
    Four green mango peppers
    Four ripe pimentoes

Put through a grinder or better still chop thoroughly with a chopper in
a wooden bowl. Don’t skimp on this labor; the chopping must be done
conscientiously. Season with salt and pour over the steak; cook slowly
for two hours. When done turn into a large platter and serve piping
hot.




II

_Rex Beach_


ONION CLAM CHOWDER

To each 10 oz. can of Pioneer Brand Minced Clams use 1 pound of sliced
Spanish or white onion.

For a good sized chowder take six large onions (white), and cut in
lengths one inch long. Pour the juice from the clams into saucepan, add
onions and a little water and boil thoroughly until onions are well
cooked and soft. Then add clams which have been taken out of the can
and put into a dish, and stew five minutes before onions are done. Next
place in a stew pan about a pint of cream or half cream and half milk
and let come to a boil. After the clams have been in with the onions
for about three minutes pour on the hot milk and season to taste with
salt and pepper. If serving in a soup plate, a little chopped parsley
adds to the attractiveness of the dish. Then EAT it.

(You can substitute for fresh milk or cream—Carnation Canned Milk
diluted—⅔ milk to ⅓ water. The soup should be thick and not too watery.
This can be regulated by amount of milk added.)




III

_Hudson Maxim_


SPAGHETTI

Take one package of vermicelli or spaghetti, and put it into a
saucepan, crushing it in the hand, then put in hot water, and salt a
little more than will suit the taste, and boil for an hour.

While the vermicelli or spaghetti is cooking, take a quart of milk
and heat three-quarters—or 24 ounces—of it until it boils. Then
stir into the eight ounces of cold milk a level cupful of flour, or
two tablespoonfuls of flour, pretty well heaped, and then stir the
thickened milk into the boiling milk and cook slowly for ten minutes.

Then add three-quarters of a pound of good, ripe, old American
cheese, and about half a pound of butter. Then drain the water off
the vermicelli or spaghetti and put in from one and one half pints
to a quart of canned tomatoes. Heat the vermicelli or spaghetti to
the boiling point; and while the mixture of cheese, butter, milk and
flour is still hot, stir the two together, then keep hot and serve
hot. Do not boil any more, because further boiling would tend to cause
the tomatoes to coagulate the milk in the mixture. I prefer to use a
mixture of spaghetti and vermicelli instead of all spaghetti or all
vermicelli.




IV

_Warren G. Harding_


WAFFLES

    2 eggs
    2 tablespoons sugar
    2 tablespoons butter
    1 teaspoon salt
    1 pint milk
    flour to make thin batter
    2 large teaspoons of baking powder

Beat yolks of eggs, add sugar and salt, melt butter, add milk and
flour; last just before ready to bake add beaten whites of eggs and
baking powder.

Bake on hot waffle iron.

    EDITOR’S NOTE:—There is a great deal of argument about the
    proper dressing for waffles. Various gravies are used by
    one school of waffle eaters; while honey, maple syrup, and
    various specially flavored sugar powders are preferred by
    another.

    President Harding is a staunch upholder of the gravy school
    and likes his in the form of creamed chipped beef.




V

_Ellis Parker Butler_


BOUILLABAISSE JOE TILDEN

In a soup kettle put four tablespoonsful of genuine olive oil. When hot
enough fry in it two large onions, sliced, and two cloves of garlic
chopped. Cut two pounds of any sort of firm white-textured fish into
small pieces and put in the kettle, just covering the mixture with warm
water.

Now have the Eighteenth Amendment repealed and add to the mixture
one cup of White Wine, the juice of half a lemon, two large tomatoes
(peeled and cut up), pepper, salt and one or two bay leaves.

Cook this briskly for twelve minutes, by which time the liquor should
be one third evaporated. Now add a tablespoonful of chopped parsley.
Joe Tilden added a pinch of saffron, but I don’t care for it. Cook two
minutes longer and serve ladled on slices of French bread.

    EDITOR’S NOTE:—Moquin’s have made a luncheon specialty of
    Bouillabaisse for many years. They add lobster and eel.
    Here is a wonderful dish to experiment with—great fun and
    delicious results if you try it once or twice. It’s a
    habit-forming dish, so beware!




VI

_Jules J. Jusserand_

(Ambassador to the United States from France)


RADISH SALAD

The French ambassador presents his compliments and begs to state that
he does not believe that any dish, or food, is more palatable than a
salad of radishes, the radishes to be cut in very thin slices and to be
seasoned with the usual salad dressing.

    EDITOR’S NOTE:—This salad will be at its best if the
    foundation, upon which the thin slices of radish are
    placed, is made of small crisp leaves of romaine. The usual
    dressing—french, of course—is prepared in this way:

    To one tablespoonful of lemon or vinegar add three
    tablespoonsful of the best olive oil, a dash of black
    pepper, and a half teaspoonful of salt. Beat well with a
    silver fork, and add enough paprika to give it a ruddy
    color, and a rich flavor. If the salad dish is rubbed with
    garlic it will do no great harm to the mixture!




VII

_Bruce Barton_


RICE PUDDING

I am president of the S. R. R. R. P.—the Society for Restoration of
Raisins to Rice Pudding.

I have made a list of New York hotels and clubs and rated them
according to the number of raisins they put in a portion of rice
pudding as follows:

    Class D—no raisins
    Class C—1 raisin
    Class B—3 or more raisins
    Class A—plenty of raisins

To my mind, rice pudding without raisins is like Hamlet without the
eggs.

    1 cup rice
    4 cups milk
    3 eggs
    ½ cup sugar
    1 teaspoonful salt
    1 package seedless raisins
    1 teaspoon of vanilla

Bake one hour in a hot oven. Set the pan inside of another containing
hot water.

Serve with whipped cream and garnish with Dromedary dates.

    EDITOR’S NOTE:—Cook the rice twenty-three minutes.




VIII

_Richard Bennett_


LIEDERKRANZ Á LA HOOSIER

Run around and find a real nice Liederkranz cheese and treat it as
follows to get a serving for four people:

Mix the cheese with about a quarter of a pound of butter and work
into a fine paste, adding salt, pepper, French mustard, paprika and
Worcestershire sauce as you go along. Just add them to taste.

When the paste is smooth put in one finely chopped small green pepper;
one small onion, or chives.

Mix well!

And serve on rye bread—spread thick. To be thoroughly technical, I
suppose I should have said: spread to taste!

    EDITOR’S NOTE:—You can have a wonderful time and make quite
    a reputation for yourself by inventing cheese combinations.
    Ordinary cream cheese makes a splendid base for original
    mixtures. Try combinations of finely minced pimento, celery,
    olives, chives and peppers (green and red). And anything
    else that promises well.




IX

_Walt Louderback_


CORN CHOWDER

_I believe my favorite recipe is Corn Chowder._

The appetite for this dish must be approached from the windy side of a
promontory in early spring with a sixty pound pack between the shoulder
blades, aforementioned pack to contain for a couple of congenial souls
a pound of bacon, a pound of dry onions, two cans of corn and one large
tin of condensed milk.

Cut the bacon up into small half inch squares and start it frying.
Simultaneously slice the onions and give them the heat. If, after the
aroma from these two begins to permeate the air, you feel like risking
their falling into the fire, start boiling the corn and milk. Before
the onions are too thoroughly cooked stir them into the bacon, at which
time the battle for the supremacy of the appetizing odors is occupying
most of your attention.

Now throw the bacon and onions into the corn pot and wait as long as
you are able so that the ingredients become thoroughly familiar with
one another.

Write me as soon as you get home if you don’t remember that day until
you are an old man.

To make this sound extremely professional I suppose I should add,
“Season to taste,” but do not mind if a few ashes get mixed in by
mistake.




X

_Captain Robert A. Bartlett, U.S.A._


COD FISH

Here is my favorite dish. Viz.:—Fresh Labrador Codfish caught during
the Caplin school. The fish is at this time in splendid condition.

Here is the recipe:

Place a small bake pot upon a wood fire; then take a few strips of fat
pork, cut up into small pieces and put into the bake pot. When the pork
fat has melted you cut the fish into several small pieces and place in
the pot. In about twenty minutes the fish is cooked. The fish must be
eaten from the pot with a wooden spoon.




XI

_George F. Worts_


SWEET POTATO PONE

There are two sure ways of identifying a true southerner. One of them
is to play “Dixie.” Unlike your northerner, or counterfeit southerner
who springs to his feet and looks exalted and proud when the band
strikes up that swinging anthem, your true, or southern southerner
rarely springs. Generally he just sets and waggles one boot, and looks
happy or sentimental, according to his nature. That is one way of
detecting your true southerner. The second and surer way is to announce
in a tremulous voice: “Gemmen, dat potato pone am done set.”

The sweet potato pone is strictly a southern dish. It is served south
of the Mason and Dixon line hot and smoking. You don’t need much
experience as a cook, although the old rule which also places “perfect”
after “practice” of course holds good. Your ninth potato pone will be
better than your third. Here is the how:

Grind up raw sweet potatoes in a meat chopper until you have one quart.
Mix the grindings thoroughly in a bowl with molasses—enough molasses so
the mass is soft and sticky, or spongy.

Mix in a heaping tablespoonful of lard.

Add a teaspoonful of allspice.

Put the mixture in a cake tin and place in a slow oven. Stir constantly
until a rich brown hue is attained, then smooth over with a knife or
spoon and allow to bake slowly until a mellow brown crust is formed.

Remove from oven, allow to cool slightly, cut in slices and serve.
General Robert E. Lee would walk ten miles for a slice of it.




XII

_Gelett Burgess_


PANDOWDY

In a quart pudding dish arrange alternate layers of sliced apples and
bits of bread; place on each layer dots of butter, a little sugar, and
a pinch each of ground cinnamon, cloves and allspice.

When the dish is filled, pour over it half a cupful each of molasses
and water, mixed well; cover the top with bread crumbs.

Place the dish in a pan containing hot water, and bake for
three-quarters of an hour, or until the apples are soft.

Serve hot, with cream or any light pudding sauce.

Raisins or chopped almonds are sometimes added.




XIII

_William Allen White_


VEGETABLE SALAD

My idea of good food is a vegetable salad. Any kind of a vegetable
salad is good; some are better than others. Here is a recipe for a
French dressing on a lettuce salad which you should try on your meat
grinder, or your potato masher, or your rolling pin or whatever kitchen
utensil you can play.

Get a crisp head of lettuce, discard the outer green leaves, using
the inner yellow and white. Wash it thoroughly, and after pulling it
apart dry each leaf with a tea towel. Put it in a big bowl—a big mixing
bowl, six inches deep anyway. Then set that to one side, and get about
as much onion as the end of your first finger would make, if it was
chopped off at the second joint. Mince that. Put it in the bottom of a
bowl. Take a large tablespoon; put in salt and paprika to taste, and
don’t be afraid of making it salty, then add oil and vinegar, about
three or four to one, mixing them in the spoon until it slops over
into the onion, and then stir the salt and paprika and oil and vinegar
down into the bowl of minced onion, taking a salad fork and jabbing it
around in the mixture until the onion has been fairly well crushed and
the onion flavor permeates the mixed oil and vinegar, and the salt and
paprika have become for the moment a part of the mass. Don’t let it
stand a second, but pour it quickly into the bowl of dry lettuce, and
then stir like the devil. Keep on stirring; stir some more, and serve
as quickly as possible.

Cheese may be mashed into the onion before putting on the oil and
vinegar and paprika and salt. If one wants to add tomatoes, wait until
the last three jabs of the stirring fork into the lettuce, and then
quarter the tomatoes and turn them in just before you turn the lettuce
over the last two or three times. This is done so that the watery juice
of the tomatoes won’t get smeared over the oil on the lettuce leaves.
If you stir the tomatoes in early, you get a runny, watery, gooey mess.
Cucumbers may be added, and they should be stirred in rather earlier
than the tomatoes in the business of mixing the lettuce leaves and the
dressing. Green peppers may be added if they are cut into strings, but
too much outside fixings spoils the salad for me. The tomatoes are
about as far as one can go wisely.




XIV

_Irvin S. Cobb_


HOG JOWL AND TURNIP GREENS

_Paducah Style_

For a person who has written so copiously about food and the pleasures
of eating it, I probably know less of the art of preparing it than any
living creature. I cannot give my favorite recipe because I have none;
but I am glad to give the names of my two favorite dishes, to wit, as
follows:

    1st—Hog jowl and turnip greens—Paducah style
    2nd—Another helping of the same.

    EDITOR’S NOTE:—Hog Jowl, Paducah Style, may be prepared like
    this:

    Get the jowl. Some prefer it cooked and served with the
    bone; others remove the bone before serving. Boil it in well
    salted water for thirty minutes, then add the turnip greens
    and boil at least thirty minutes longer. Serve with plenty
    of butter for dressing; a dash of vinegar and a semi-colon
    of mustard are used by some folks who are hard to please.

    Beet greens could be used but they are not considered au
    fait, and to use spinach is an absolute faux pas.




XV

_Richard Walton Tully_


HAWAIIAN CROQUETTES Á LA “THE BIRD OF PARADISE”

It was about fifteen years ago that I first visited the Hawaiian
Islands in search of material for my play, “The Bird of Paradise,” and
during the course of my sojourn I made many friends among the natives,
often living weeks at a time with them in out-of-the-way villages.
Although their food was radically different from ours in many of its
contents and modes of making, it was always palatable, and often
strikingly delicious. However, most of the native dishes contained
ingredients which we cannot obtain here, but I did learn how to make
what some of my friends have nick-named Hawaiian Croquettes à la “Bird
of Paradise,” the materials for which are easily procured. And it is a
dish so wonderfully appetizing that I constantly prepare it for guests
of epicurean tastes.

First grate the meat of half a cocoanut, and add to it a cup of
(cow’s) milk, mixing thoroughly, and straining through cloth. Melt
two tablespoonsful of butter over a low flame, rubbing into it with
the back of a spoon five tablespoonsful of flour, stirring until very
smooth. Then add slowly the strained cocoanut and milk liquid, stirring
constantly until very thick. Season meanwhile with one and a half
teaspoonsful of salt; one of paprika, and one of grated onion. Finally
add two cups of cold, boiled, shredded mullet, or any other firm white
fish, and two cups of cold, boiled, chopped lobster, and after stirring
allow to cool.

Shape into croquettes, or balls, allowing a rounded tablespoonful to
each ball; roll in fine cracker crumbs; dip into an egg which has been
slightly beaten and to which one-quarter of a cup of water has been
added; again roll in cracker crumbs.

Have a deep pan of fat, hot enough to fry a piece of bread a golden
brown while you count forty, and cook the croquettes therein for about
a minute; then drain on paper, and serve with olives.




XVI

_William Johnston_


OYSTERS PECHEUR

One keg of freshly dredged oysters put on the deck of the schooner not
later than eight p. m.

One hundred pounds of ice put on top of the oysters.

Shell and eat at 5 a. m. on the way to the fishing grounds with salt to
taste, and occasional draughts of hot coffee.




XVII

_Dr. Charles M. Sheldon_


LIKES BREAD AND MILK

A recipe of my favorite dish is very simple—bread and milk with
American cheese broken into it. I eat this dish once a day every day
and find it wholesome and nourishing. It does not require any skillful
putting together, simply a good appetite and a taste for that sort of
provender. If there is an apple pie anywhere around to top it off with,
I do not despise that.

I find as a rule that the simpler and more elementary the food, the
better so far as the body is concerned. And take it the year around a
bowl of milk with fresh bread and rich American cheese, finishing up
with “good apple pie like mother used to make,” is all the midday meal
I need. I can work on that all the afternoon and feel better than if I
had had a seven course dinner.




XVIII

_James Montgomery Flagg_


“JAMES MONTGOMERY SUDS”

This is a dessert. When a Swedish cook is put on her mettle to suggest
a dessert—something different—she stands a while in uffish thought,
then breaks out into a smile of satisfaction and says “Snow Pudding”!
It’s Swede law. The Swedes _must_ suggest Snow Pudding when asked for
an original thought in the dessert line.

So this dessert of mine was a protest.

There is one very difficult ingredient—wine jelly! The jelly is easy
enough, but where in Jell do you get the wine?

If you don’t have wine jelly—it’s all off—no use beginning. If you
can get the wine then you put some cut-up oranges in wine jelly with
an inch layer of beaten whites of eggs on top and lightly brown this.
A loose custard is poured on each helping. It sounds rather punk and
ladieshomejournalish but is a perfectly good dessert.




XIX

_Roy L. McCardell_


“EGGS MUSHROOMETTE”

This is the queen of breakfast dishes and should be served, of
course, with broiled ham, the king of breakfast dishes, hot
buttered toast, and several cups of fresh-made, fragrant and
just-strong-enough-to-bring-out-full-flavor, percolated coffee!


_Recipe_

Peel and slice a half pound of fresh mushrooms and cook in butter in
old-fashioned frying pan till nearly done. The pan is now good and hot.
Moderate the heat and put in three fresh eggs and fry them very slowly,
constantly basting top of eggs with the hot butter the mushrooms
have been cooking in. Cook well, slowly and thoroughly till all the
mushrooms that attach are nestling in the white of the eggs like plums
in a pudding. Serve, when thoroughly cooked, with the broiled ham,
fresh coffee, and hot buttered toast.

This dish, as here described, is for one person only—as it is too good
to be shared with anybody else.

P. S.—Eggs should never be fried so quickly that the whites are cooked
to isinglass. Cook them slowly, surely, thoroughly and baste with hot
mushroom butter as directed, and you will have Eggs Mushroomette and
have eaten a poem!




XX

_Judge Ben B. Lindsey_


BRAN MUFFINS

Judge Lindsey’s favorite recipe is one for Bran Muffins, as follows:

    1 pint milk
    1 egg
    ½ pound wheat flour
    ¾ pound bran flour
    2 tablespoonsful molasses
    2 ounces pecan meats (½s or ¼s)
    2 ounces sugar
    2 ounces butter
    ¼ ounce salt
    2 ounces Sultana raisins
    1 ounce baking powder

Sufficient for 18 muffins.

Bake 30 minutes in well-heated oven.

    EDITOR’S NOTE:—The addition of Pecan meats with the raisins
    produces a muffin that—well, the line might better have
    ended thus: _produces a muffin_!




XXI

_Otis Skinner_


ARTICHOKES, MISTER ANTONIO

Force a small opening in the head of the artichoke by giving it a blow
upon the table. Then, into the center pour a dessertspoonful of olive
oil in which a little salt and pepper have been mixed. To this add a
quarter of a clove of garlic.

Place the artichokes in such position that they may not be overturned.
Surround them with cold water, and allow them to boil, covered and
undisturbed, for half an hour.

This is an Italian method, and by following it one may understand why
an artichoke need not taste as flat as boiled hay.




XXII

_Dan Beard_


A BURGOO

Clean and dress the meat of a soft-shelled turtle, a painted turtle, a
poker-dot turtle, or almost any other kind of turtle. Clean and dress a
rabbit, a ruffled grouse, moose meat, elk meat, deer meat, sheep meat,
in fact any sort of game. Cut your meat into pieces about the size of
inch cubes. Save the bones, especially the marrow bones, to put in with
the meat. Add some salt pork cut into cubes, if you have it.

If you have been thoughtful enough to supply your outfit with some
ill-smelling, but palatable dry vegetables, they will add flavor to
your burgoo, put all the material in a kettle, and fill the kettle half
full of water. If you have beans and potatoes do not put them in with
the meat because they will go to the bottom and scorch. While the stuff
you have already put in the kettle is boiling, or simmering, peel your
onions and quarter them, scrape your carrots and slice them, peel your
potatoes, cut them up into pieces—about inch cubes. After your caldron
has commenced to boil dump in the fresh vegetables, they will cool off
the water and kill the boil. Do not let it come to a boil again, but
put it over a slow fire and allow it to simmer. There should always
be enough water to cover the vegetables. A can of tomatoes will add
greatly to the flavor. Use no sweet vegetables like beets or sweet
potatoes. Put the salt and pepper in just before you take it off the
fire. When the burgoo is done, strain it into tin cups. The liquid
out of an olive bottle adds greatly to the flavor if you pour it in
while the stew is cooking. If you have such luxuries in camp as olives
and lemons, a slice of lemon with an olive in each cup over which the
liquid is poured makes a dish too good for any old king that ever lived.

The excellence of a burgoo depends upon two things, the materials
you have of which to make it and the care you take in cooking it. No
two burgoos are alike, and every one I ever tasted was mighty good.
Civilized material such as can be purchased at the butcher shop and
the vegetable store makes a good soup, but the “goo” isn’t there.
Consequently you cannot call it a burgoo.




XXIII

_De Wolf Hopper_


RASPBERRY SHORTCAKE

RASPBERRY SHORTCAKE, with the assistance of a rich and kindly disposed
cow, meaning lacteal fluid on same—that is my chief debauch!


_Recipe_ (_for two people_)

Sift a level teaspoonful of baking powder and a scant half teaspoonful
of salt through a cupful of flour. See that the mixture is thorough.
Take lard or butter (butter is best) and work it well into the flour
until it crumbles under the fingers. Use plenty of finger work. Now
add a very small quantity of milk and work into a dough that is easily
rolled and flattened on a floured board. Roll out and cut in round
cakes to fit cake tins. Have cakes about a half inch thick. Bake in
a moderate oven until light golden in color. In serving have lots of
berries—half of them—crushed. Split the shortcakes and butter them, if
desired. Above all use thick, rich cream in generous doses. The dish is
really best when the cakes are just from the oven—instead of cold.

The same goes for strawberry shortcake and makes the only _real genuine
old-fashioned shortcake_.




XXIV

_Chick Evans_


TOMATO SOUP

I have a fondness for tomato soup and steak without grizzles. Since
almost any one can broil a steak I’ll pass that up and tell you how to
play cream of tomato right around the kitchen course in par.

You can take ripe tomatoes, cut them up, stew them and put them through
a strainer. You can add a bit of soup stock and seasoning and all that,
but the easy way is to take some of Mr. Campbell’s tomato soup and add
milk instead of water—only use more soup, per person, than the can
label calls for.

Don’t boil it—but when the soup is good and hot give it a bit of
informal seasoning and then stir in _a lot_ of stiff whipped cream.
Keep back enough of the whipped cream to put a big spoonful of it in
the center of each plate.

Use the can opener at the first tee and with luck you’ll be on the
dinner table in an easy three. Play out of the soup plate with a good
sized spoon for a par four—and there you are!

You’ll be able to whip the cream without detailed directions. The
important thing is choosing the right egg beater or cream whipper or
whatever you use. The next important thing in whipping cream is stance.
You’ll gradually acquire that, after you’ve spattered the front of
your vest a time or two, and hooked a few long ones to the wall paper.
I believe that there are some safety devices for whipping cream, but
they take all the sport and excitement out of the thing.




XXV

_Joshua A. Hatfield_


EGGPLANT SAUTÉ À L’ALEXANDER

_For About 12 People_

Take two large eggplants, have them peeled and cut into large flakes
of about 1¼ inches in size, season with pepper and salt, pass through
flour and fry in hot fat pan to brown color; chop finely and sauté to
yellow color, six French shallots and two beans of garlic, and add to
the eggplant. Keep stirring on moderate fire for about three minutes,
serve in vegetable dish and spray with chopped parsley.


POTATO STICKS ALEXANDER

Take six nice boiled potatoes, let them drain and pass through sieve,
put in stewing pan on the fire, add four yolks of eggs, one spoonful of
fresh butter, one spoonful of puff paste; one green pepper, one sweet
pepper, two slices of boiled ham and parsley all finely chopped, and
pepper and salt to taste.

Mix while on the fire for about five minutes, then let it cool down.

Of this dough roll sticks of ½ inch in diameter by 1½ inches long,
pass through flour, beaten egg, and white bread crumbs, fry in fat pan
and serve on napkin with fried parsley.


COLD SAUCE ALEXANDER

(_Served at India House with Cold Salmon_)

_For 12 People_

Incorporate into good mayonnaise, chopped chives, parsley, chervil,
two tablespoonsful of French mustard and dash of Worcestershire sauce,
paprika, pepper and salt; stir well.


SUPRÊME OF CHICKEN À L’ALEXANDER

Take the breast of a four-pound roasting chicken (stuff very lightly
with a filling made of chicken, cream and fresh mushrooms mixed with
white of egg) and have it poached in butter and chicken broth. After
being done remove the suprême and have the sauce reduced to one-quarter
of its volume, then incorporate first one tablespoonful of sweet
butter and add six finely chopped French shallots, one-half glass of
white wine, two spoonsful of brown sauce (demi-glacé), season well
with pepper and salt, let it cook for about three minutes, and strain
through fine sieve.

Dish suprême on a fried canape cut to shape and sauce it.


_Garniture_

    Fried eggplant cut in Julienne shape
    Green peppers sauté in butter
    Fresh tomatoes sauté

Arrange the vegetables around the suprême on platter by keeping them
each separately and serve sauce apart.


FONDU AU FROMAGE À L’ALEXANDER

Melt two tablespoonsful of butter and work with three spoonsful of
flour into light brown color; add one pint of milk, let it boil for
five minutes, constantly stirring; incorporate ½ pound of grated Swiss
cheese or domestic Roquefort, a little salt and paprika, and bind with
six yolks of eggs; let cool down.

This preparation cut and roll into sticks of ¾ inches diameter by 1½
inches long, pass through flour, beaten egg and bread crumbs, and fry
crisp in hot fat pan.

Serve in napkin with fried parsley.


POACHED EGGS EN CROUSTADE À L’ALEXANDER

Work into a dough ½ pound of flour, one tablespoonful of butter, two
whole eggs and a little salt; cut this pie-crust dough into tartlette
forms, say 3 inches in diameter, place in molds and bake in moderate
oven.

Melt two tablespoonsful of fresh butter, add 12 finely chopped
shallots, ¼ pound of finely chopped fresh mushrooms, pepper, salt, and
let it simmer, by constantly stirring, until it is thoroughly cooked,
and finish with chopped parsley; mix well into this two tablespoonsful
of demi-glacé. Cover the bottom of tartlettes with a layer of this
preparation, place a freshly poached egg on top, cover with thick cream
sauce, spray with grated Parmesan cheese, a dash of melted butter, and
bake in moderate oven for about five minutes.

Dish up on napkin with crisp fried parsley.


ROMAINE SALAD À L’ALEXANDER

Decorate half a head of Romaine with sliced grapefruit, sliced orange
and white grapes split and seeded, or large black cherries.

Prepare dressing as follows: Incorporate into French dressing finely
chopped chives, French mustard and teaspoonful of red currant jelly;
mix well and use as dressing for above salad.


ROGNONS DE VEAU À L’ALEXANDER

Take six fresh veal kidneys, remove skin and fat, and cut to very small
cubes, adding ½ pound of very fine chopped fresh mushrooms, and put
aside.

Melt two tablespoonsful of butter with twelve finely chopped shallots
and brown to a nice golden color. Add the kidneys and mushrooms and
let it simmer for about eight minutes, taking good care not to let it
cook too much, preventing the kidneys from getting hard; incorporate
into this appareil one pint of demi-glacé, one cup of bread crumbs (for
thickening) chopped parsley, pepper and salt, and let it cool down.

Cut round canapes of bread 3 inches in diameter, and ½ inch thick, and
fry in butter to crusts, and drain; then cover the crusts with this
preparation to a half ball shape, pass through beaten egg, spray with a
mixture of bread crumbs and grated parmesan cheese and dash of melted
butter on top and bake in moderate oven for about ten minutes.

Dish up on napkin with fried parsley, and serve with demi-glacé sauce
separate.


STRAWBERRY TARTLETS ALEXANDER

Work into a dough ½ pound of flour, ¼ pound sugar, 1 tablespoonful of
butter, 2 whole eggs, and a little salt.

Cut the dough to oval or round tartlet forms, have them baked in
moderate oven, and after they are cooled down fill out the bottom of
the tartlets with custard (Crème Patissière). Cover the cream entirely
with a layer of selected fresh whole strawberries, and apply, with a
decorating brush, lightly diluted red currant jelly; spray the top with
finely chopped pistachio nuts.


BAKED OYSTERS ALEXANDER

Open six large oysters, keep in deep half shell, place in roasting pan
and cover with Sauce Alexander as follows:

         { two tablespoonsful of Chili sauce
         { one tablespoonful of horseradish sauce
    Mix: { one tablespoonful of French mustard
         { one dash of Worcestershire Sauce
         { finely chopped chives, salt and pepper

Take good care the oysters are entirely covered by the sauce, then
spray with bread crumbs, and have them baked for about eight minutes.


ÉMINCE OF CHICKEN À L’ALEXANDER

Select a choice five-pound fowl, have it boiled, cut into flakes and
put aside.

Brown in saucepan ¼ pound of butter and two tablespoonsful of flour to
a nice yellow color, add to this one quart of chicken broth and let it
boil for a few minutes, keeping on stirring it; beat into this sauce
six yolks of eggs and the juice of two lemons, working it all the time,
but taking good care not to let it boil any more; pass it through a
fine sieve and keep it hot in Bain-Marie.

Cut into flakes and sauté in butter ½ pound of fresh mushrooms, then
take ¼ pound flaked boiled Virginia ham, one bunch of finely chopped
Tarragon and mix this with the chicken flakes in the thoroughly heated
sauce; season with salt, pepper and paprika to taste and serve in
chafing dish; place on freshly made toast or hot buckwheat cakes.




XXVI

_Stewart Edward White_


MULLIGAN

This is a camp dish to be cooked over an open fire. I guarantee nothing
on a stove. I know nothing of stoves, and have a dark suspicion of
them. To make it: Place in a kettle half full of cold water either (a)
fish cut in chunks, (b) a couple of dozen clams, or (c) a half dozen
chunks of venison about the size of a tennis ball, depending on whether
you want a Fish Mulligan, a Clam Mulligan, or a Game Mulligan. Also
depending on what you have. Also a half dozen peeled potatoes and three
large onions. Salt and pepper, bring slowly to a boil. Add a handful
of cubes of salt pork or bacon. Simmer slowly until the potatoes
disintegrate. If you have the remains of a can of corn or a little
residue of cold rice or anything of like nature, drop them in. Next put
in all the stale bread or hard tack the traffic will bear. Dissolve a
tablespoonful of flour in a little warm water, and stir that in for
thickening. Cook slowly until you can’t stand it any longer, and fly to
it.




XXVII

_Oliver Herford_


FRIED ELDERBERRY BLOSSOMS

This sounds like a joke but it is a perfectly serious dish—I made its
acquaintance at the table of a little inn in South Baden, on the shores
of Lake Constance.

First you must wait until the elderberry bushes are in full bloom. Then
you gather a good sized bunch of them—and cut off each blossom just
below the point where the little stems join the main stalk.

These you dip into a light egg batter such as is used to make apple
fritters (lighter, perhaps), taking care to cover both the flower and
as much of the little stalks as possible. They should be served like
fritters as soon as made.




XXVIII

_Reed Smoot_


PEACH COBBLER

One of my favorite dishes is peach cobbler. I am told that it
originated in the south, but its fame has spread far beyond the limits
of the Mason and Dixon line. It is made in this way:

Line a baking dish or pan, about three and one-half inches deep, with
a rich pastry. _There must be no break in the pastry._ Then fill the
dish to the brim with peaches—ripe, luscious ones, that have been pared
and broken—not cut—in half. Sugar generously, and leave in about six or
eight of the peach pits—they give a certain flavor that only peach pits
may impart.

Cover the peaches with an _unbroken_ upper crust of pastry; seal it
tightly along the sides, so that none of the juices or aromas may
escape. Bake in a slow oven until nearly brown—then sprinkle the top
with powdered sugar, that will give a certain professional luster to
the dish. After that finish the browning process.

A cobbler containing a quart of peaches should bake for about one hour.

    EDITOR’S NOTE:—Senator Smoot is not alone in his partiality
    toward peach cobbler. Back in the days before Volstead,
    famous cobblers were produced just as above with the
    addition of brandy, say a cup to a quart of peaches—but
    that, of course, was a long time ago.




XXIX

_Ray Long_


SHAD ROE

Dip the roe well in melted butter or bacon fat, place under hot
broiler flame, cooking for five minutes on each side. Then place in a
greased baking dish, season with salt, tabasco, Worcestershire sauce
and paprika. Dot over with a little more butter, or bacon fat, add a
small quantity of hot water, cover closely and bake in an oven until
tender—about fifteen minutes. This may be garnished with crisp bacon
which should be cooked separately.


_Dessert_

Slice fresh pineapple, cover with sugar, and put on ice for several
hours. Serve with lemon water ice.




XXX

_Kenneth C. Beaton_

(“K. C. B.”)


LOBSTER

    Get a couple of lobsters.
    Split and cleaned.
    And put in a pan.
    And dot each piece.
    With bits of butter.
    And put the pan.
    In a very hot oven.
    And broil ten minutes.
    And after that.
    Lift meat from shell.
    Onto heated plates.
    And serve with sauce.
    Made in a bowl.
    With a bit of mustard.
    Stirred in water.
    And a pinch of salt.
    And of paprika.
    Just a dash.
    And a scant teaspoon.
    Of Walnut catsup.
    And a tablespoon.
    Of Worcestershire sauce.
    And mix them all.
    With half a cup.
    Of melted butter.
    That’s just been heated.
    And not boiled.
    And serve it all.
    With a mess of potatoes.
    Baked or boiled.
    And boy, oh, boy!
    There is a dish.
    Fit for the gods!
    I thank you.




XXXI

_John Harvey Kellogg, M. D._


MACARONI WITH CHEESE

    1½ cups macaroni
    1 cup Cottage Cheese
    2 hard boiled eggs
    2 tb. butter
    2 cups milk or sufficient to cover the macaroni

Boil the macaroni in salt water until tender. Place a layer of macaroni
in the bottom of a baking dish, a layer of cheese (½ C.), sliced hard
boiled eggs, layer of macaroni and the cheese—bits of butter are placed
between the layers and on the top, sprinkle cracker, bread or PEP
crumbs over the top, moisten with cream or bits of butter; sufficient
milk is poured over to just cover the macaroni and bake in rather a
slow oven for about forty-five minutes.


SAVORY POTATOES

    1 pint sliced potatoes
    ½ small onion
    1 tb. butter
    1 cup water
    1½ teaspoon salt

Place the thin sliced potatoes in the bottom of a baking dish, slice
the onion over this and add the remainder of the potatoes; pour hot
water over all with butter and salt. Bake in a slow oven two hours.




XXXII

_Clare Briggs_


WAFFLES

There is a simple but effective recipe for one of the kitchen’s most
wonderful products.

    1¾ cups flour
    3 teaspoons baking powder
    ½ teaspoon salt
    1 cup milk
      Yolks of 2 eggs
      Whites of 2 eggs
    1 tablespoon melted butter

Mix and sift dry ingredients; gradually add milk, then yolks of eggs,
well beaten. Next the melted butter and last the whites of eggs, beaten
stiff. Cook on a very hot and well-greased waffle iron and serve with
maple syrup.

    EDITOR’S NOTE:—President Harding favors creamed chipped beef
    as a dressing for waffles while Mr. Briggs is a staunch
    supporter of the sweet-tooth school.

    For those who like the sweet stuff this variation of plain
    maple syrup is worth trying:

    Put one half pound of strained honey in a double boiler, or
    a small pan placed in water. _Heat very slowly_, adding a
    half pint of pure maple syrup with which has been previously
    mixed two teaspoons of powdered cinnamon and a dash of
    caraway. Heat and stir until thoroughly mixed—but do not
    boil. Serve warm.




XXXIII

_Edward W. Bok_


ASPARAGUS

The food I like?

The dishes I really crave?

The things off which I would dine every day of my life?

I never see them. I never have them.

Why?

Because Mrs. Bok says there is not a digestible dish amongst them.

But I often think of them,—wistfully, oh, so wistfully!

Here they are:

    Soft-shell crabs, done in hot olive oil; or hard-shell crabs; deviled.
    Lobster with mayonnaise.
    Filet Mignon; panned in brown butter.
    Veal loaf.
    Roast pork tenderloin.
    Fried eels.
    Sausages; never had enough; ditto scrapple!
    Currants with a hot roll lightly wound through them.
    Hot fresh doughnuts.
    French pancakes of a thinness like unto gauze.
    Strong black coffee.
    Chocolate meringue glacé.

But as I never had the good fortune to know the above foods at first
hand, I cannot well give you the recipes for them.

Perhaps you might like to know my favorite way of serving asparagus
in my home, Dutch fashion, as I remember it in my native land of The
Netherlands.

The asparagus bunches are placed in a double boiler upright, the tips
being above the water, and thus cooked by steam. Passed at table,
with the asparagus, is hard-boiled egg, put through a ricer, a small
quantity of finely ground nutmeg and a dish of hot, melted butter. It
always has to be explained to guests, but once the introduction is over
the convert is made!




XXXIV

_Charles Hanson Towne_


CORN PUDDING

There is no dish I like better than a Corn Pudding made just like this:

    2 cups of grated corn
    ½ cup of milk
    ½ cup of cream
    1 tablespoonful of flour
    ½ tablespoonful of salt
    1 teaspoonful of sugar
    1 tablespoonful of butter
      A pinch of baking powder

Cook for a half hour and serve immediately. It is brown on the top, and
in a deep dish it is the most succulent course a man could wish for.
I want others to share it with me. I wish I could give a party every
night with this as the _pièce-de-résistance_!

    EDITOR’S NOTE:—In speaking of the origin of this dish Mr.
    Towne says that it was “first made by my wonderful colored
    housekeeper, Hattie Jefferson.”




XXXV

_Jerome D. Kern_


TERRAPIN

My favorite dish is Stewed Terrapin and my recipe follows:

Cut the boiled calves’ liver into moderate sized pieces and put into
stew pan with sufficient fresh butter to stew it well.

In another pan make a sauce of pre-Prohibition Sherry or Madeira,
flavored with the beaten yolk of one egg, powdered nutmeg and mace, a
pinch of Cayenne pepper, salt to taste, enlivened with large lump of
butter.

If pre-Prohibition Sherry is not available, names and addresses of
seventy-one bootleggers can be supplied.

Stir sauce well, and just before it comes to a boil, take it off the
fire.

Use three or four hard-boiled hens’ eggs to pinch hit for turtle’s eggs
and send to the table piping hot in chafing dish.

IMPORTANT: Serve the sauce separately. The terrapin is frequently
ignored by those who prefer the flavor of the sherry. I am one of them.




XXXVI

_Daniel Willard_


COTTAGE PUDDING

    One tablespoon butter
    One cup sugar
    Two eggs
    Half cup milk
    One large teaspoon baking powder
    One and a half cups flour

Bake in a square tin and serve with strawberry sauce.


STRAWBERRY SAUCE

One large tablespoon of butter beaten to a cream. Add gradually one and
a half cups powdered sugar and the beaten white of one egg. Beat till
very light and just before serving add one pint of strawberries which
have been cut in small pieces.




XXXVII

_Houdini_


SCALLOPED MUSHROOMS AND DEVILED EGGS


_The Mushroom Dish_

Choose for this purpose fine firm ones. Pick, wash, wipe and peel—then
lay them in a deep pudding dish well buttered. Season them with pepper
and salt, and add a little onion. Sprinkle each layer with rolled bread
crumbs, dot with small pieces of butter and proceed in this way until
dish is full, having the top layer of bread crumbs. Bake in a moderate
oven.


_The Eggs_

Boil the eggs hard. Remove shells and cut eggs in half, slicing a bit
off the ends to make them stand upright. Extract yolks and rub them to
a smooth paste with melted butter, cayenne pepper, a touch of mustard
and a dash of vinegar. Fill the hollowed whites with this and send
to table upon a bed of chopped lettuce or water cress, seasoned with
pepper, salt, vinegar and a little sugar.




XXXVIII

_Charles P. Steinmetz_


MEAT LOAF

I have been consulted about very many things, but this is the first
time I have been consulted on gastronomical matters. But I give
herewith, from my camping experience, the following favorite dish of
mine:

Beef, veal, and pork (sirloin steak and chops), ½ pound each. Cut
off the bones and the fat from the beef and veal, leaving the fat
on the pork. Then pass all three through the meat grinder, chopping
fairly fine. Add two complete raw eggs and some finely sliced bacon
(Beechnut bacon, cut in pieces about 1 inch square) and mix everything
together thoroughly, adding the proper amount of salt and pepper and if
available some celery salt. Form into the shape of a round loaf.

In a cast iron or cast aluminum frying pan (that is a pan of
sufficiently heavy metal to well distribute the heat and guard against
local burning) melt some butter, then put the loaf in the melted
butter and cover the pan. Heat on a very low fire, turning over after
some time, and continue for a long time, until very thoroughly cooked
through. Add butter once or twice when absorbed. Then uncover and
greatly raise the fire, turning over after a little while so as to
brown both sides.

Then take out the loaf and put it on a warm platter or plate. Now pour
a cup of cream or rich milk into the pan, stir until the sediment in
the pan is dissolved, and heat until you get a good brown gravy. Pour
this over the loaf and serve with boiled mealy potatoes. What is left
over can be eaten cold, sliced and served on buttered toast.




XXXIX

_Charlie Chaplin_


STEAK AND KIDNEY PIE

This is how I do it:

    Get 2 pounds lean steak
        1 beef kidney
        1 small onion.

Cut the steak and kidney into two inch pieces. Flour them. Add pepper
and salt to taste. Line a deep pie dish with rich pie crust after
having buttered dish. Put inverted egg cup in center. Fill with meat
and finely chopped onion. Add water almost to top of dish. Roll pastry
half inch thick and cover all. Make several small holes in pastry to
permit steam to escape. Bake three hours in moderate oven. EAT.

    EDITOR’S NOTE:—Steak and kidney pie is a favorite with many
    beside the great film comedian. Interesting variations of
    Mr. Chaplin’s recipe are:

    _Lamb kidney instead of the beef kidney._

    _Top crust only._

    _Fry the meat chunks before putting them into the pie._




XL

_Dr. Frank Crane_


ROUND STEAK

Somebody named Johnson, a name with most excellent vibrations, writes
me and says that in spite of rumors he has heard, to the effect that I
have a hired hand or two to write my stuff, he believes that I honestly
wrote all by myself an article which appeared some time ago over my
name, in which I stated I could cook round steak so that it would taste
as good as fried chicken and be as tender.

“If you are not bluffing,” he says, “you could do a world of good
to many housekeepers and stag clubs if you would print your recipe.
The writer has worn the outer coat of enamel off his teeth in a vain
attempt to make himself believe that round steak is as tender as
chicken. Give us a hand, pal.”

Hence, being called, I lay my cards down, face up, on the table, to
wit, namely and as follows:

Have the butcher cut you a round steak thin. A little thicker than a
lead pencil. He will insist on cutting it thicker, saying it will be
juicier and so on. Draw your revolver and compel him to obey you. Don’t
have the steak too thick.

After cutting the steak from the piece, have him separate it into
portions, each about the size of your hand. Don’t try to cook the steak
all in one piece. It must be in small sections, just as fried chicken
is best when each joint is cooked separately.

Have the butcher then take his sharp knife (which is much better for
the purpose than any knife you have at home, because he knows the art
of sharpening and you don’t), and criss-cross each piece, on both
sides, don’t forget. So that each piece will be in tatters, almost
ready to fall apart.

Put in the frying pan plenty of good sweet lard. Don’t use butter. It
will burn. Don’t fry in deep fat, as with doughnuts, but plenty of fat,
as with fried chicken.

Rub each portion of the raw steak in flour. Rub it in good. Drop into
the hot skillet. Cover it with lid. Keep covered. This cooks it through
and makes it tender.

Fry till a golden brown, turning once in a while. You notice the
process is exactly as with fried chicken, Southern style.

After you lift out the meat, put in the flour, let it scorch a bit,
then pour water and milk mixed into the hot grease and meat particles
left in the skillet. Just how much, you will have to find out by
experiment. Let it boil up and boil down, keep stirring, until you have
gravy of the right consistency. Flavor according to taste, with salt
and pepper, before cooking. If the result is not good it is because you
have not followed directions.

Round steak not only is cheap, but it is all good meat, with the
minimum of waste, and properly cooked it TASTES better than any part of
the beef.




XLI

_Robert H. Davis_


CREAM SAUCE Á LA WORCESTERSHIRE

This incomparable concoction is to be united in the bonds of holy
wedlock with a piece of fried ham, the ceremony to be solemnized on a
hot rasher, hooded.

Select a thick slice of mild cured ham, fry it in its own fat in a hot
skillet until both sides show a golden brown. Place in a large cooking
spoon one spoonful of Worcestershire sauce, and one heaping tablespoon
of rich cream. Set the cooking spoon in frying pan beside ham until
Worcestershire and cream become warm, adding a few drops of ham fat
while the sauce is heating. Complete the perfect union on the rasher by
pouring the sauce over the ham.

Put a Mendelssohn Wedding March disc on your phonograph and conclude
the honeymoon at the table.

    EDITOR’S NOTE:—This sauce was created by Mr. Davis at a
    breakfast given at the Wyandanch Club, Long Island, by Mr.
    Charles R. Flint to Admiral Guy Gaunt of the British Navy
    and Irvin S. Cobb of the United States of America in 1915.




XLII

_John A. Dix_


FRIED TROUT

For my favorite dish—unhesitatingly—baked beans and pork, country style.

As to my favorite recipe, that requires many condiments, among others
a mountain trout stream; the inspiration of the odor of the woods; the
vigor of early morning and the pursuit. The requirements, just enough
trout plus a few. From the pack basket take a piece of pork or bacon,
fry well in a skillet over a carefully laid fire. Prepare the fish and
roll well in fine bread crumbs seasoned with salt and pepper. When the
fish are done a golden brown remove from the skillet and partake in the
aboriginal manner, eating from the fingers. Kings could do no more.




XLIII

_Guy Bates Post_


LAMB CURRY Á LA “OMAR, THE TENTMAKER”

    1 onion (diced)
    1 cup of stock
    ½ cup of rice water
    1 cup of potatoes, which have been previously boiled and diced
    2 cups of lamb, cold roast preferred, and cut into the size of dominoes
    2 tablespoons of Curry Powder (Cross and Blackwells, or other
          imported—_never domestic_)
      Zest of one lemon
      Salt to taste

Give me the above ingredients, and I will make you the meat dish
which, above all others, is, to my way of thinking, the most savory
and delicious. Eight years ago, when I was first playing “Omar, the
Tentmaker,” I became acquainted with various members of the Persian
Embassy, who were especially interested in the play because of its
Persian locale, and it was while dining in the home of one of these
gentlemen that I first became initiated to lamb curry—that is, lamb
curry as it really should be cooked! Begging the recipe from my host,
it has ever since been the favorite pièce-de-résistance in my home.

First of all you brown the onion in olive oil in a deep pan; then add
the stock, rice-water, salt and curry powder; the latter having been
mixed with a little of the rice-water to insure a smooth sauce. Simmer
slowly till the oil and curry float in dark blobs, add the lamb, and
continue simmering and stirring until just before serving, when the
lemon juice should be dripped in.

Lamb curry should always be served with hot rice, taking on your fork
equal portions of both, increasing the amount of rice in case you find
the curry too hot. Never drink water with curry, as it intensifies the
burning sensation. The amount of curry powder used in the above recipe
can be increased or decreased according to the individual taste. Cold
cooked shrimps, lobster, veal or chicken may be used in place of lamb;
but never beef. Personally I find that lamb produces the finest curry
dish.




XLIV

_Dr. Don Rafael H. Elizalde_

(Minister from Ecuador)


SANCOCHO

Four pounds of loin beef cut into two-inch squares.

Eight good-sized potatoes.

Five or six ears of green corn, broken in lengths of two inches.

Water sufficient to make the amount of soup required.

Boil until the beef is tender, with the potatoes, then add the corn and
cook until done.


_Onions_—

Slice thin three large onions—boil for half an hour, drain and cool.
Then pour olive oil over them.


_Banana Paste_—

One quart of milk in a double boiler; add two heaping tablespoonsful of
banana flour mixed in a little milk to a smooth paste, and cook from
half hour to an hour.


_How to Serve_—

Strain the soup through a colander and serve in a tureen, placing meat,
potatoes, corn, onions and banana paste in separate, individual dishes
from which each person may help themselves.

(In South America the yucca and plantains are used in this dish.)


YAPINGACHO

Make potato cakes by the ordinary recipe, but before shaping them place
a piece of cream cheese the size of a walnut in the center of each;
then fry brown in very little fat.


_Sauce_—

One quart of milk and one half pound of peanuts ground fine; boil until
thick, seasoning with salt, paprika and butter.

Serve the potato cakes with fried eggs and pour the sauce over both.




XLV

_Bide Dudley_


TOMATO SOP

Slice firm, ripe tomatoes; roll in flour and fry in equal parts of
lard and butter until brown on both sides. Remove several slices to a
platter, stir those remaining with flour and small lumps of butter:
then thicken with milk and season to taste.

Sop with bread or toast.

    EDITOR’S NOTE:—This is good. But in the interest of the
    culinary art it should be stated that the flour, and not the
    milk, is the thickening agent.

    Try it—you’ll thank the author of “tomato sop.”




XLVI

_William Hale Thompson_

(Mayor of Chicago)


ROAST BEEF

My favorite food is Roast Beef, rare, or a good American sirloin steak,
which, I take it, are so simple to prepare that they need no recipe.


_Suggestions_:

1. Stand your roast on two or three thin slices of bacon—not too fat.

2. On the top of the roast lay three or four thin slices of
lemon—particularly if you like the “outside cut.”

3. If your steak looks a bit fresh rub with lemon juice (both sides)
and allow to stand several hours before broiling or frying. Don’t be
frightened if it turns a bit black—be glad.

4. Pan may be rubbed with garlic.

5. Steaks should be _thick_, particularly if you broil.




XLVII

_Booth Tarkington_


CORN FLAKES

My favorite dish is corn flakes. They should be placed in a saucer or
hollow dish, then lifted in both hands and rolled for a moment, then
dropped back into the dish. After that an indefinite quantity of cream
should be poured upon them. They should be eaten with a spoon. I don’t
know how to prepare anything else for the table. I think the best
Kennebunkport manner of steaming clams is as follows:

    A bushel of clams
    4 dozen lobsters
    4 dozen ears of sweet corn
    4 dozen sweet potatoes
    4 dozen eggs

A cartload of seaweed, a bonfire burning for six hours on rocks, then
swept away; the lobsters, clams, etc., placed in the seaweed, and the
seaweed on the hot rocks and covered with BBB canvas. Allow to steam
until screams of distress issue from the seaweed; then be careful what
you eat!




XLVIII

_T. A. Dorgan_


CHILI CON CARNE

_Comes through with a natural_

What is my favorite filler for the feed bag? Well, I’ll be on the
square with my answer.... It’s Chili con Carne.

I might have said Terrapin Maryland, or some other Ritzy dish, but
thought I’d better come with a natural.

I’ll play Chili con Carne and tamales as they are served in California
(where I was born) against any dish I’ve ever forked over.


_Recipe_

Cut, say, two pounds of good beef in small pieces the size of the first
finger joint. Add some of the chopped fat, mix and salt.

Put two tablespoonsful of lard in a deep pot and heat. To this add a
chopped onion. When the onion is about half cooked add the meat. Stir
well until the meat has boiled down in its juice. When it starts to
fry add about one and a half pints of hot water, three tablespoonsful
of Gebhardt’s Eagle Chili Powder and a few buttons of chopped garlic.
Simmer and stir well until the meat is tender.




XLIX

_William De Leftwich Dodge_


RAGOUT DE MOUTON

I think my favorite dish is “Ragout de Mouton,” or, I would say, the
one I cook the best.

The way it’s done is this:

Cut up lamb in small pieces and fry it in a frying pan. Slice three or
four carrots and onions and fry them with it. When these are nicely
browned, put into a pot, cover with water, and let boil slowly for an
hour. Then put in a few potatoes and turnips (cut up in small pieces),
and boil until done. Season as you see fit.




L

_Montague Glass_


BOUILLEBAISSE

Bouillebaisse is my favorite dish. I make it according to the recipe
of Valentine Blanc, our cook in Nice, where we lived some years ago.
Valentine could neither read nor write, nor could a story tell, but her
Bouillebaisse was ever so much better than that they make in Marseilles
(and I venture to say in Thackeray’s old restaurant either).

Melt about a half pound of butter in a sauce pan. I’m aware that in
Marseilles they use oil, but Valentine used butter. Don’t let the
butter burn. Have ready two large chopped onions—i. e.—onions chopped
fine, and two “dents” of garlic also chopped fine.

Cook these in the butter until tender and without burning. Have ready
three perch and one haddock. That is to say: cut off the heads and
tails. Some people use eels instead of haddock. I detest eels. Cut into
a large saucepan the heads and tails of the fish with about a quart of
water and let simmer until well cooked, say about half an hour. Strain
out the heads and tails and give them to the cat.

Add the cooked onions and garlic,—butter and all—to the strained
bouillion from the heads and tails and allow to simmer for half an
hour more, after seasoning to taste with salt and white pepper. Add
about a gill of dry white wine of any variety,—Chablis, Cotes du Rhone
or what not,—the cheaper the wine the better. Now take two smallish
lobsters, alive, and if you have the heart, cut them into segments and
take off the claws and cut _them_ into segments. Cook the massacred
lobster for about a quarter of an hour in the liquid or liquor or
bouillon above described and add a saltspoonful of dried Spanish
saffron, while the whole is cooking together. If you can get mussels,
cook also with the entire mess, a dozen or so,—in their shells if the
shells be well scrubbed in advance. Somewhere in this process add about
a tablespoonful of chopped parsley. Last of all, add the fish cut into
convenient slices rather small, and let cook until done, but not long
enough so that the fish becomes disintegrated. Remember there ought to
be no violent boiling.

Before serving strain off most of the liquor and serve it first as soup
with a slice of toast in the bottom of the plate. If the toast has been
fried in advance in good butter, so much the better, but this is not
necessary. Then eat all the solid part except the shells and sop up all
the remaining gravy with bread, using your fingers to do the job and
not a fork. Don’t leave a bit of it.

There ought to be enough of this stew for four people, but I can
usually manage the whole thing myself with only the slightest
assistance from my wife. Wine ought to be drunk with the meal, a good
Burgundy Beaune or Chambertin. Later one should eat an artichoke cold
vinaigrette, then some fruit and cheese and two small cups of well made
black coffee. After this it is necessary to smoke a Corona Corona not
too mild, and drink a small glass of Cointreau Sec. The bread ought to
be _Pain Riche_ in flutes. The fruit may be fresh apricots, a few green
almonds and perhaps some green gages.

The coffee ought to be drunk and the cigar smoked in the garden which
must be in the vicinity of Mount Boron on the Grande Corniche or it may
be in the Parc Imperial. God ought to be thanked either during or after
the meal, and when it becomes a little too cold in the garden a fire
should be built in the small living room and one should read Somerville
& Ross’ _Recollections of an Irish R. M._, or Neil Lyon’s _Simple
Simon_, or Belloc’s _Path to Rome_, or Richard Ford’s _Gatherings from
Spain_ until bedtime.

Repeat the whole process on the following Friday.

God! How hungry I am.




LI

_John Philip Sousa_


PELOTAS Á LA PORTUGUESE

    “_This serves from six to eight people and is my
    favorite dish._”

One quart can of tomatoes. Put in kettle on top of stove, simmer or let
boil slowly for one and a half hours. Add pepper, salt, two onions cut
in fine slices, four allspice and four cloves. The cloves and allspice
to be added after it starts to boil. After two and a half hours add:

Two pounds chopped beef; add one onion, chopped fine, two cups bread
crumbs, a little parsley, salt and pepper. Make into meat balls about
the size of a plum. Put into sauce and boil one and one-half hours
slowly. This makes fully three hours’ slow boiling for the sauce.


SPAGHETTI

Use a package or a pound of spaghetti; not macaroni. Have a large
pot of boiling water with about one tablespoonful of salt. Slide the
spaghetti into the water. Do not break it. Boil exactly twenty minutes.
Must be tender, not tough nor doughy.

To sauce, add three bay leaves one hour before taking off the stove.

Serve spaghetti on large platter, pouring tomato sauce over it. Serve
pelotas on smaller platter, allowing a small quantity of sauce to
remain on them.

Serve grated Parmesan cheese on side. Use a piece of cheese to grate,
not bottled cheese.




LII

_Will Hays_


CHICKEN PILAU

_“Get a fat hen—the fatter the better.”_

Because this recipe comes from a Southern cook, there are no accurate
measurements.

Sam would always recommend a “fat hen”—“the fatter the better,” and
“’nough rice and plenty of pepper.”

This I know: The chicken is cut up and boiled in the water until
tender. Should be cooked in a good sized flat bottom kettle. When the
chicken is tender there should be enough of the stock to come up well
around it, but not to cover it. Then put in with the chicken about a
scant pint of well washed rice. This should be stirred ONCE, Sam says,
and allowed to steam slowly an hour. Use plenty of pepper to season and
salt to taste. Each grain of rice should be fat and juicy. Successfully
made it is delicious.

    EDITOR’S NOTE:—The Chicken Pilau recommended by Mr. Hays is
    delicious. A variation perhaps equally good, may be had by
    substituting broken spaghetti, or vermicelli for the rice.




LIII

_Frank Ward O’Malley_


RUM-TUM-TIDDY

    “——_has the best Welsh rabbit backed off the stove._”

Take one country home in New Jersey. One dependable apple-jack
bootlegger. One cook who threatens to leave unless she can begin her
nightly visits to her daughter in the village as early as seven-thirty
o’clock.

Take three or four acquaintances who drop in for apple-jack cocktails
just as your cook is about to put the steak on to broil. Then have
your guests linger near the cocktail shaker until you, your wife and
especially your delayed cook are approaching hysteria.

“Why not stay,” you now announce to your guests in desperation, “and
we’ll all make a rum-tum-tiddy?”

You now tell your grateful cook not to bother preparing a meal. You
next take one flivver and hurriedly drive her to her daughter’s in
the village. Then you buy in the village one and one-half pounds of
American cheese, one can of Campbell’s Tomato Soup and a dozen bottles
of beer—real beer, if you can get it, Volstead beer if you can’t.

_NOW_:—

Pry your guests away from the cocktail shaker and shoo them into the
kitchen. Everybody from this on who is not occupied in mincing the
green pepper in a chopping bowl is busy cutting the American cheese
into cubes about an inch square. Everybody else beats two fresh
eggs—whites and yolks together.

Drop a lump of butter into a saucepan to prevent “sticking.” Begin to
melt the pound and one half of diced cheese in the saucepan, stirring
the lumps to prevent burning. When the cheese is fairly well melted,
pour into it the can of tomato soup and the two beaten eggs. Stir into
the mixture about one-third of a bottle of beer. Pour in also the
finely chopped green pepper and continue stirring until smooth.

Have hot dinner plates ready, each plate containing a large slice of
hot, unbuttered toast. Place at least one bottle of beer—two if it’s
real—beside each plate.

Holler “Ready, people!” and pour on each piece of toast enough of the
contents of the saucepan to form a pinkish overflow of rum-tum-tiddy on
the plate.

That’s all—except to shake ’em up a semi-final cocktail and then start
right back to the village in the flivver for another pound and one half
of cheese, another pepper and more beer to make another immediately
when the first rum-tum-tiddy is gone. One calls for two, often three.

Serve preferably in the kitchen. Serve in any room far from the kitchen
if you want leg work exercise. Eat until gorged.




LIV

_Charles Evans Hughes_


CORN BREAD

    “_My favorite dish is corn bread and honey._”

And here is a recipe for corn bread:

    2 cups of flour
    3 cups of cornmeal
    4 heaping teaspoonsful of baking powder
    2 eggs well beaten
    1 teaspoonful salt
    1 tablespoonful sugar
    1 pint of milk
    2 tablespoonsful of melted butter

Mix the meal and flour, baking powder, salt and sugar. Beat the eggs
until they are light, then add the eggs and milk to the meal. Beat to a
light smooth consistency and add the melted butter. Bake in a shallow
pan (greased) for about twenty-five minutes.

Eat while hot and use plenty of fresh butter and honey.

    EDITOR’S NOTE:—There is a white meal and a yellow. Expert
    appraisers of corn bread have said that the white meal is
    preferable. Still the golden hue of a pan of hot corn bread
    is not to be passed up lightly.




LV

_Walter Prichard Eaton_


MINCE-PIE

    “_Made any other way it’s not mince-pie._”

My favorite dish, and the best food in the world, is King Canute
Pudding, but I shall not tell anybody how to make it, because that is
a family secret. I am descended from Canute, and this was the pudding
he ate and which made him feel so good that he went out and bade the
tide to cease rising. The recipe is handed down in each generation of
my tribe. It was my paternal grandmother who had it to pass on. She
lived to be ninety-nine, thanks to her own wonderful cooking and a
cantankerous disposition. Her mince-pie was a thing to write sonnets
about. It was the second best food in the world. For ten years after I
went to New York I lived on the memory of that pie and shuddered at the
horrendous messes masquerading under the same name which were offered
to me.

Then I moved back to New England and achieved a cook who, by the grace
of God and the right bringing up could make a pie like it. For six
years I knew happiness again. Then we lost Kate, the incomparable. My
only hope was my wife and that was a feeble hope, indeed. She was born
not in the pie belt, but in New York. She had never cooked. She was an
Episcopalian. I approached the next Thanksgiving breakfast with gloomy
forebodings.

But lo, a miracle. It was an orthodox mince-pie. It was Katie’s
mince-pie. It was grandmother’s mince-pie—in short, it was mince-pie.
Here is the way to make it. Made any other way it’s not mince-pie.


_The Filling_

Affix the grinder firmly to the edge of the table. What the palette is
to the artist so is the grinder to the creator of mince meat. Then pass
the following ingredients through the grinder, and from thence into a
large kettle and let the latter and its glorious contents simmer on the
stove for the best part of a morning, stirring them frequently so that
no portion shall be neglected and fail to come into close union with
the soothing heat that mellows all into one fragrant whole. Take from
the stove and store in stone crocks or glass jars in the dark, and keep
tightly covered. When about to fashion a pie take out as much of the
meat as you desire, wet it with boiled cider and with fresh cider, too,
if possible, so that it is not stiff, and bake between the crusts whose
ingredients are given below. Eat hot with soft dairy cheese and coffee.

The meat should be thoroughly boiled the day before the mince meat is
made, and the cider should be boiled down at home—not bought—until it
is the consistency of molasses. Boil enough to last all winter and put
in glass jars. Now, alas, that no liquors may be had, it is well to
bottle fresh cider and put it away where it is cool, so that with luck
it may still be fresh when in March you scrape the last jar for the
last pie. Only use care when it is opened, or perchance it will be the
ceiling rather than the pie which will be wet down.

    5 cups cooked beef; after grinding
    2½ cups suet
    7½ cups apples
    3 cups cider
    ½ cup vinegar
    1 cup molasses
    5 cups sugar
    ¾ pound citron
    2½ pounds raisins
    1½ pounds small raisins (not to be put through grinder)
       salt to taste
       juice and rind of 2 lemons
       juice and rind of 2 oranges
    1 tablespoon mace and nutmeg (or 2 nutmegs grated)
    2 tablespoons each of cinnamon, cloves and allspice
    2 tablespoons  lemon extract
    1 teaspoon almond extract
    3 cups liquor in which beef was cooked

If you have wine or brandy put in a cupful after taking from the fire.


_The Crust_

    2 cups pastry flour sifted with teaspoon salt.
    ½ cup (generous) of lard mixed in with fingertips till
    the combination is fine and powdery.

    Wet with cold water, mixing with knife, and cutting, till
    you can take the dough from the bowl without sticking to
    it. Divide in half, pat gently on floured marble slab, and
    roll out thin. Lift lower crust carefully, place in tin and
    trim off edges. Roll out from trimmings a strip half an inch
    wide and place on top of lower crust, around edge, first
    wetting edge slightly with cold water. Put in filling, place
    upper crust on top, first wetting edge of rim slightly with
    cold water, press together with tines of fork and trim off
    overhanging of upper crust. Prick a large T. M. on the top
    crust and bake in hot oven till brown.

(The T. M. stands for “’Tis Mince” to distinguish it from the pies
labeled T. M. for “’Tain’t Mince.”)




LVI

_W. T. Benda_


POLISH SPECIALTIES

In following my Polish recipes you will find a practical use for the
geometry of your school days. If you have forgotten the axioms of
Euclid, take a correspondence course before attempting “Ushka.”

It is simple when you finally master it—and marvelously good. Don’t
forget the line B D. Everything hinges on that.


BARSHCK WITH USHKA

_Barshck. (Or Polish Beet Soup)_

If you are brave, put three large beets, peeled and quartered into a
glass jar and pour on them a quart of water, add a teaspoonful of salt
and a slice of rye bread. Keep this in a warm place for about five
days. There will form a sour red-wine-like juice with a whitish mold
skin on the top. Don’t lose your courage, take this skin off and pour
off the juice.

Then prepare a quart of beef, pork and vegetable stock and while it
is hot add to it all your beet juice and a bottle of cream which you
previously have beaten with a teaspoonful of flour. Heat and stir it
all just to boiling point, but do not let it boil, and serve with or
without “Ushka” which are fully described in the next paragraph.


_Ushka_

Barshck is really not complete without “Ushka,” and as they are a very
simple dish to prepare you should never omit them.

To make “Ushka” prepare first a fine hash of half a pound of boiled
pork and beef with one small onion, a tablespoonful of flour, salt and
pepper.

[Illustration: Fig. 1]

Make white sauce of butter and flour and a little water, mix this with
your hash, let it stew for a while, then add one raw egg and stir it
madly.

Now mix a dough, using half a quart of flour, one egg, two
tablespoonfuls of water, half a teaspoonful of salt, and butter of the
size of a walnut. Knead this vigorously for half an hour, or until it
is quite smooth.

[Illustration: Fig. 2]

[Illustration: Fig. 3]

[Illustration: One-third size of beets]

Roll the dough out into a sheet 1/8 of an inch thick and cut it into
2½ inch squares. Put on each dough square a teaspoonful of your hash;
fold them diagonally along the line BD (Fig. 1) and press the edges
together, thus joining the edge AB unto the edge CB and AD unto CD.
You will thus obtain the right angle triangle ABD (Fig. 2) with the
hash inside. Now curve this triangle along the hypotenuse BD until the
45 degree corner D meets the 45 degree corner B. Let these two corners
overlap a little and press them together until they stick. The shape
resulting from this operation resembles a pig’s ear, as depicted in
Figure 3.

Now put these _pig’s ears_ or _Ushka_ into boiling water; they will
sink, but that should not distress you. Leave them there until they
come to the surface. Put the Ushka on a platter and pour on them brown
butter with crumbs and serve them as a side dish with _barshck_.


BURACHKI

(_Beets à la Polonaise_)

Boil eight little beets, skin them and chop them (not too fine).

Take one level tablespoonful of butter, and one tablespoonful of flour.
Brown it until it is of a golden hue. Stir into this half a cupful of
vinegar, two tablespoonsful of sugar, half a teaspoonful of salt and a
little pepper. Bring it to boiling, then mix this with your beets.




LVII

_Captain Edward A. Salisbury_


SAUCE FOR SPAGHETTI

This sauce for spaghetti is a real Italian mixture—and wonderful. This
is how I learned to make it in Italy:

Place in a cup or bowl a half teacup full of _dried_ mushrooms. Pour
boiling water over them and just let them stand until thoroughly
softened, say—about a half hour.

In the meantime cover the bottom of your frying pan or skillet with
butter or olive oil (I prefer the butter). Chop one big onion and cook
slowly, stirring frequently. In another pan or kettle place two cans of
tomatoes. Stew them for half an hour. Then make three small cakes of
Hamburg steak or chopped beef and put them in to cook, with the onions.
Cook thoroughly. Add at the same time the mushrooms which have been
softened and chopped into fine particles.

When the meat is cooked through mash the cakes up with a fork—mixing
well with onions and mushrooms.

Now add the stewed tomatoes and, in doing this, press them through a
sieve or colander. Stir well.

Place on back of stove and let steep for one hour after adding two
teaspoons of Eagle Chili Powder (if available) or two teaspoons of Lea
& Perrins sauce with five dissolved cubes of beef or chicken bouillon.


To cook the spaghetti, place it, unbroken, in well salted boiling
water. Put it in end first. Boil exactly twenty-three minutes. Drain.
Hold under cold water tap for a second or two and drain again. Keep
warm on stove until served. This cold water treatment is important. It
removes all gumminess and leaves the spaghetti in perfect condition.
Use the imported spaghetti if available.


EGGS À LA SALISBURY

Here is a dish that is easy to make and delicious.

I poach the desired number of eggs until they are just solid. Then I
place them on hot, crisp toast, covering the eggs with beautifully done
bacon.

Over the lot, I pour hot cream until the eggs are floating.

Salt, pepper and paprika to taste.

Try this for breakfast.


FISH À LA COMMODORE

Say you are cooking a six pound bass or some similar fish—do it this
way for a change:

Rub the fish well with salt and pepper. Don’t be afraid to rub. Then
open the flesh in three places and insert in each opening a clove of
garlic.

Next slice six large onions—six small green peppers—and six large
tomatoes. Now take your Dutch oven or baking pan and cover the bottom
with Mazola oil or olive oil—add a tablespoon of butter.

When this is _hot_ put in your fish and cover the fish with the sliced
vegetables. Salt and pepper the vegetables.

Cook until the vegetables are done or about one hour. Baste frequently
to avoid scorching the vegetables. To the basting add two teaspoons of
Lea & Perrins sauce and one-half wine glass of cooking Sherry when half
done.

When serving put plenty of juice and sauce on each portion and make
them come back for more. This recipe can be used for many kinds of
large fish.


TO COOK TROUT

Dip trout in beaten egg, salt and pepper. Roll in flour and drop into
very hot and very deep Mazola oil. Remove when golden brown. The trout
will be perfectly free from oil and every bit of the delicate trout
flavor will be sealed up inside. Try it!


VENISON STEAK

Venison steak is fairly poor steak at best. But there is one way to
cook it that makes you forget all past experiences with venison. And
remember this is really the only way to cook it that’s worth a damn.

Take the venison and strip out _all of the white sinews_ that lay
between the muscles or lean parts. Strip and cut this white part all
away. Then cut your venison into small strips about the thickness of
a finger. Now you are on your way. Beat up an egg or two and beat in
a bit of salt and pepper. Dip your strips of venison in the egg, then
roll them in flour. Fry in butter and serve immediately.

Every hunter or guide who has tried this sticks to it. It’s the one way
to cook venison.


GOOSE

There is only one way for a man, or any one else, to cook a goose.
Listen: Never pick a goose! Just pull the skin right off—every inch of
it.

Then take a sharp knife and follow down the breast bone on both sides.
Strip the breast meat clear away from both sides. Split each side of
breast into two thin steaks (if large goose).

Dip these steaks in beaten egg, salt and pepper. Roll in flour and fry
over a medium fire. That’s new to most folks for goose and it’s going
to give you a new idea about geese when you try it.


A MAYONNAISE AND A SALAD DRESSING

Take yolks of two eggs, beat well and add slowly (drop at a time) olive
oil. If your mixture is too thick lighten with dash of lemon or vinegar.

Now into a half pint of this mayonnaise put three tablespoons of Chili
sauce; three tablespoons of Blue Label Ketchup; one tablespoon of
finely chopped pimento; one tablespoon of finely chopped blanched sweet
peppers.

To this add one-half teaspoon of salt—pepper and Hungarian paprika to
taste.

Then add, slowly, Tarragon vinegar to taste—say about one and one-half
tablespoons.

Serve this on shrimps, lobster, lettuce or tomato salad.


DUCKS AND LARGE FOWL

Ducks, such as Mallard, Canvasback and Redhead, should be baked. If you
once learn how to bake in a Dutch Oven you have found the secret of
successful camp cookery.

Take a Mallard, for instance. Rub it with salt and pepper (I might add
here: pick ’em dry and keep ’em dry—no water near a duck!), then put an
onion well up in the body cavity. Fill the remaining space with celery,
wild or domestic.

Get your oven, or Dutch oven, very hot before the duck goes in. Use no
grease and no water—just your dry pan or oven. A big Mallard will cook
perfectly in twenty minutes. Do not open oven or take lid from Dutch
oven after starting to cook. Serve with currant jelly.


TEAL, PARTRIDGE AND SMALL FOWL

Pick, without breaking the skin. Cut open the back and break out flat
for grilling or broiling. Broil bone side to the fire for _eight_
minutes. Souse frequently with melted butter.

Turn and broil, flesh side to the fire, for _four_ minutes, using more
butter. Salt and pepper thoroughly at time of turning.

Serve with currant jelly.


BEANS

Get a deep pot for beans. A heavy iron one is mighty good.

Take a half pound of salt pork and cut it into very small pieces. Fry
them until brown.

Clean your beans and soak them for at least two hours—or more. Then
boil the beans for two hours, after which add the pork and one can of
Mexican Chili Sauce. If this is not available, make your own by frying
with the salt pork: four tomatoes, three onions, two bell peppers and
one red pepper, all chopped.

Now you’ve got your mixture and after it’s all together put in six
beef bouillon cubes; salt and pepper to taste.

It’s a good idea to have enough water in the pot so that when the
beans are done a fine soup may be enjoyed before the beans are eaten.
Altogether three to four hours of cooking is necessary for the best
results with beans.


ITALIAN RICE

First, a word about cooking rice. Buy the best head rice. Wash it
thoroughly,—six waters. Drop rice slowly into well salted, boiling
water, and boil for twenty-three minutes. Drain off three-quarters of
water and hold rice under cold water faucet for a moment; this will
leave each grain firm and perfect. Drain thoroughly.

Now the sauce. Place in your skillet olive oil to cover the bottom;
also tablespoon of butter. Chop one large Spanish onion. Place it in
the skillet and cook slowly. Stir often.

After ten or fifteen minutes, a piece of white fish (sole preferred)
about the size of your four fingers, from the palm down—see? When the
onions are a golden color add one finely chopped clove of garlic. When
fish is thoroughly cooked, mash it up with a fork and stir well. Now
add one or two cans of tomatoes which have been stewing slowly for half
an hour or more. Add them through a sieve and push with a spoon so as
to get the thick part through. Mix well.

Place this on the back of the stove where it will simmer for one hour.
Add a pinch of saffron or thyme—salt and pepper to taste.

This sauce can be used for only one meal, as it sours after a few
hours. Sauce should be applied by each person as desired until it’s all
gone.


STEAK SAUCE

Have a large platter very, very hot—really hot!

Then the minute the steak is done, put it on the platter and work fast.
Over the steak sprinkle a very little bit of dry English mustard. Then
a squeeze or two of lemon. Now several thin slices of butter, a little
Worcestershire sauce, salt, pepper and paprika. Rub all this in with a
broad knife. Turn steak and repeat the operation. Now tip platter on
edge and quickly whip the sauce into a froth, using a fork. Serve two
or three tablespoons of sauce with each piece of steak.




LVIII

_Thomas H. Ince_


CHICKEN HALIBUT

(_Baked and with Parmesan_)

Boil some slices of halibut in court bouillon, lay in baking dish a
border of potato croquette—either hard or shaped with hand. Have layer
of bechamel on bottom of dish—then one of shredded fish, another layer
of bechamel and one more of fish, finishing with the bechamel; sprinkle
with bread crumbs and grated Parmesan. Pour over a little butter and
brown in the oven.

_With Parmesan._ Prepare same and make solid paste by mixing together
butter and Parmesan cheese with pinch paprika. Work well and roll out
one-eighth inch thick. Cover last layer bechamel with this and brown in
hot oven.

_Bechamel Sauce._ Prepare roux of butter and flour, let cook few
minutes while stirring—not allow to color—remove to slower fire and
leave it to cook 15 minutes. Then dilute gradually with half boiled
milk.


ONION SOUP AU GRATIN

Cut into small 1/8 inch squares two medium onions, fry them in butter
and add two dessert spoons flour and moisten with two quarts of broth,
adding bunch of parsley garnished with chervil, bay leaf and clove and
garlic. Season with a little salt, pepper and some meat extract, boil
for 20 minutes—then remove the bouquet—pour the soup over very thin
slices of bread placed in a metal soup tureen in intervening layers of
bread and cheese—Parmesan—finishing with the Parmesan and sprinkle a
little over the top of the soup. Bake in hot oven or boil ten minutes
and thicken with raw yolks of two eggs diluted in cream.


RICE Á LA MANHATTAN

Chop two onions—fry in butter, add a pound of rice and beat together.
When very hot, add enough broth to triple quantity—let boil and cook in
slack oven for 20 minutes. Add when done, six ounces grated Parmesan.
Pour ⅔ of this into casserole, make hole in center and fill with
shrimps and minced mushrooms; around sides lay fillet of sole, pour
over lean Spanish sauce—reduced with essence of mushrooms—mix well and
cover whole with remainder of rice—put in hot oven for fifteen minutes
and serve.

Sauce:—1 quart of stock—melt ¼ pound of butter—stir in same amount of
flour—making clear paste—add stock—brown slowly.




LIX

_George Ade_


“SCOLLOPED” OYSTERS

If I must make a decision, I think I shall have to vote in favor of
escalloped oysters. Back home we call them “scolloped.” The restaurant
and hotel article is not the real thing. The portions are stingy and
the oysters are heated just enough to render them helpless and they lie
embedded in some dry packing, evidently meant to be an article of food.
Escalloped oysters, as prepared at home, came in a deep pan which had
been subjected to great heat. The oysters were used with the greatest
prodigality. They were cooked in cracker crumbs or corn meal and they
were cooked until the delicious flavor of the bivalve had permeated all
parts of the dish. Milk or cream and real country butter had been used
unsparingly, so that the whole compound was moist and the seasoning
had been well distributed, and the whole result was, in my opinion, a
triumph. For some reason, the real “scolloped” oysters attain their
perfection only when prepared by women past thirty years of age.

I am not undertaking to give the recipe. Probably it is something
secret—beyond the reach or comprehension of any man, but the dish
itself is worthy of all the complimentary adjectives.

    EDITOR’S NOTE:—Here is the way to do it—first butter the
    bottom and sides of a pan (deep) or baking dish, then
    cover the bottom with those little, round, old-fashioned
    oyster crackers, all crisp and salty. Next place a layer of
    oysters, fresh or cove. If you don’t know what cove oysters
    are ask some one who was raised in the Middle West. Now a
    layer of crackers crushed; then more oysters and so on until
    the pan is full. Season each layer of oysters with salt
    and pepper. Put little bits of butter all over the cracker
    layers. Now fill the pan with milk and cream to which has
    been added a bit of the oyster liquor. Cover the top well
    with crushed crackers. Put a cover on the dish or pan and
    slip it into the oven. Some folks add a teaspoonful of
    Worcestershire sauce to the milk and cream. Bake until the
    juices bubble up. Don’t let too much of the moisture bake
    away. At the last minute take the cover off the dish and
    brown the top.

    The richer the cream and butter the better the result.

    The dish is even better than Mr. Ade would lead you to
    believe, and it _can be made_ by an amateur male cook—that’s
    why Mr. Ade’s contribution is printed in spite of the rank
    heresy to which he professes.




LX

_Lyman Abbott_


DEEP APPLE PIE

Dr. Lyman Abbott’s favorite dish is a Deep Apple Pie, which is made
like the deep fruit tarts so plentiful in England.

Here is a thoroughly satisfactory way to make Dr. Abbott’s specialty:
Line a deep pie tin with a rich crust, fill with tart, juicy apples
sliced very thin. Sprinkle sugar and a little cinnamon over them.
Scatter bits of butter over the apples, about a tablespoonful in
all. Also sprinkle with a tablespoonful of water. Use four or five
tablespoonsful of sugar. Cover with top crust and bake slowly for a
half, or perhaps three-quarters of an hour.

For the real _deep dish_ pie put the apples, sugar and butter (above
proportions) in the individual deep dish and cover with top crust. Bake
the same. The spices may be varied to taste.




LXI

_Terry Ramsaye_


LETTUCE (à la Red Creek)

In behalf of my favorite fodder, the tender leafling lettuce that’s
newly sprung in June, I am pleased to present a method of introducing
it to the human system with a maximum effectiveness.

WILTED LETTUCE:—It is said that this dish comes to us from the
Hessians. If this be treason let us make the most of it.

Having obtained the lettuce, young and tender and fresh from the patch,
plucked before it is yet headstrong, toss it into a bucket of cold
water to crisp it.

Repairing to the kitchen, place on the hot stove a skillet and heave
into it a good sized cupful of chopped bacon. Let it fry thoroughly.
Add a dessert spoonful of salt, a pinch of mustard, a couple of
tablespoonsful of granulated sugar and good cider vinegar in quantity
slightly in excess of the bacon fat. Let it simmer smartly until well
blended. Meanwhile lay out the lettuce in noble heaps on the plates on
which it is to be served. Chop up a handful of green onions, a bit of
the tops will do no harm, and at the last moment stir them into the
concoction in the skillet.

While the whole is sizzling and boiling vigorously, pour the mixture
over the lettuce, using a spoon to apportion the nifty bits of bacon
about, and serve forthwith.

By this method one can take aboard amazing quantities of lettuce, which
is most desirable in view of the fact that this gentle herb contributes
strongly to the summer languor when taken in adequate quantities.




LXII

_R. L. (Rube) Goldberg_


HASH

All joking aside, my favorite dish is hash.

I have never actually been in the kitchen to see hash pass through the
various stages of its epicurean development, but I imagine hash is
manufactured something like this:

First the father must eat a big lunch, the mother must fill herself up
on cake in the afternoon and the children must have spoiled stomachs.
This condition of affairs ruins the evening meal completely and there
is plenty of meat left over for hash the next day.

The cook takes the beef or veal or whatever it is and throws it into
the electric fan. The flying bits of meat are caught on ping pong
rackets by experts and knocked back into a pot that contains a large
quantity of mashed potatoes. Then the fire is lighted and the cook can
go out to an afternoon movie.

The beauty of hash is that, no matter how it tastes, you think it is
all right. There is no standard flavor for hash. Hash is fundamentally
accidental, so it has no traditions to live up to.




LXIII

_Channing Pollock_


CORN BREAD

When I was young and sometimes went camping my favorite dish was corn
bread. In those days, we always began proceedings by building a mud
oven. Now I believe portable ovens are convenient and cheap. In any
event, following is my recipe:

    2 cups of flour
    3 cups of cornmeal
    4 heaping teaspoonsful of baking powder
    2 eggs well beaten
    1 teaspoonful of salt
    1 tablespoonful of granulated sugar
    1 generous pint of milk
    2 tablespoonsful of melted crisco or lard
          Do not scald the cornmeal.

Mix the meal with flour, baking powder, salt and sugar, beat the eggs
until they are light, add the milk and eggs to the other ingredients.
Beat the whole until it is smooth and light—about one minute. Finally
adding the melted crisco or lard; pack into shallow, greased pan and
bake in a hot oven for twenty-five minutes.




LXIV

_Hussein Kahn Alai_

(Minister to the United States from Persia)


CHIRIN POLOW

Necessary materials: One pound of rice (Carolina rice is most
suitable); one spring chicken; the peel of four oranges; four ounces of
sugar; half a pound of salt; two grams of Spanish saffron; two ounces
of almonds; half a pound of butter.

Method of cooking the rice: If the dish is required for a luncheon at
one o’clock, it will be necessary, the night before, to rinse the rice
three times in water, rubbing it each time with the palms of the hands.
Change the water each time.

Next soak the rice in tepid water, letting the water stand three inches
over the rice. Pour the half pound of salt on the rice and let it stand
until 11 a. m. of the next day.

Into a two gallon caldron pour six quarts of water and let it boil.
As soon as it boils pour out slowly and with care the water in which
the rice has been soaking since the night before. Empty the rice into
the boiling water. Cover the caldron and increase the heat. As soon as
the caldron containing the rice begins to boil remove the cover and
stir the rice gently with a flat spoon. Then replace the lid and let
the contents of the caldron boil again. Repeat the stirring process
three times. Next drain the rice in a sieve, shaking it to remove
all adherents of salt and starch. Now melt a quarter of a pound of
butter in a large cup of water. Pour half of the melted butter into a
one-gallon caldron and gently empty the rice into the caldron in such
a way that it will spread uniformly without sticking together in rice
balls. Place the caldron in a hot oven. Close the oven and after five
or six minutes see if the caldron is hot; if it is, bring it out gently
and pour the remainder of the melted butter over the rice and replace
in the oven. Now reduce the heat until the caldron gives a hollow sound
when rapped with the fingers; this will indicate that the rice is
sufficiently cooked.

Preparation of the almonds: Boil the almonds for a few minutes until
the skins fall off and the almonds become white. Cut the almonds into
four quarters perpendicularly.

Preparation of the orange peel: Remove the white part of the peel to
such an extent that both sides of the peel are of the same color. When
this has been done cut the peel into long thin strings. These should be
boiled in two waters so as to remove all bitterness. Then strain.

Combining the almonds and the orange peel: Mix the almonds and the
orange peel and boil them in a syrup of sugar for ten minutes. Strain
and keep in a warm place until needed.

Cooking the chicken: Begin boiling the chicken very slowly at eight
o’clock in the morning. Boil to such a point that the skin and bones
detach themselves from the flesh.

Preparation of the saffron: Warm the saffron to remove all dampness
and pound it to a powder in a mortar; after which dissolve it in three
tablespoonsful of cold water.

Dishing the Polow: One half of the rice should be taken from the
caldron and mixed in a bowl with the orange peel and almonds. Over this
sprinkle three tablespoonsful of saffron water to color well. Now pour
over it about two tablespoonsful of melted butter.

Next remove the remainder of the rice from the caldron and dish it up
ready for the table. Place the chicken from which the skin and bones
have been removed on top of the rice. Crown the whole with the rice,
which has already been mixed with the almonds and orange peel and
colored with the saffron.

This will make a delightful and pleasantly flavored dish—Chirin Polow,
which means “sweet Polow.”




LXV

_William J. Bryan_


FRENCH-FRIED ONIONS

Onions are on my permitted list of foods and they are prepared for the
table in many ways. The best way that I know of has been given the name
of French-fried onions. I first ate onions in this form at the famous
Grove Park Inn, Asheville, North Carolina, and have since introduced
the dish on dining cars and into many private homes.

Take a Bermuda onion—any other large onion would do—cut it into slices
through the rings so that each slice will be made up of a large number
of whole rings. Then break the slices up into separate rings, drop
these into a thin batter and fry them as you fry French-fried potatoes.
Each ring looks like a little doughnut. I find that the dish is
universally praised.

May I add a word in regard to radishes, of which I am very fond. The
long White Icicle radish is, in my judgment, the best variety and I
have found that butter added to the salt makes the radish a little more
palatable.




LXVI

_Will Irwin_


HAM AND EGGS

Take a frying pan and some ham. Cook the ham in its own fat in the
frying pan—cook until the ham is well dappled with golden brown, or
until it is cooked enough. Then break some eggs. Take out the ham and
put it on a hot platter, then put in the eggs. Baste them a bit with
the hot ham fat. Put a cover on the pan and let the eggs cook in the
hot pan with no fire. A minute or two will do—then serve the eggs with
the ham and—oh, boy!

For the very best results use the best ham you can get and plenty of
day old eggs.




LXVII

_Douglas Fairbanks_


BREAD TART

    1 cup fresh bread crumbs
    1 cup sugar
    1 cup chopped nut meats
    1½ teaspoons baking powder
    5 eggs
    2 tablespoons grape juice
    1 lemon


_Filling_

    1 egg
    ½ cup chopped walnut meats
    ½ cup sugar
    ½ cup lemon

Soak bread crumbs with grape juice and the strained lemon juice. Beat
egg yolks and sugar together until light; then add nut meats, baking
powder, bread crumbs and the beaten whites of the eggs. Divide into
buttered and floured layer tins and bake in a moderate oven for twenty
minutes. Put together with filling. Beat up egg, add sugar, lemon juice
and walnuts. This tart may be covered with frosting if liked.




LXVIII

_Julian Street_


SOLE Á LA MARGUERY AND DUCK WITH ORANGES

I have two favorite dishes: both being examples of the French cuisine
at its highest.

One is “Sole à la Marguery” (which can be made with flounder, also) and
was originated by old Monsieur Marguery at his famous restaurant in
Paris. It has a sauce which has a wine base and which contains shrimps
and small oysters.


_Sole à la Marguery_

    Lay your sole in a buttered platter, add about a glassful of
    white wine, season and poach:

    I. E. Let boil for about fifteen minutes and then take
    the juice out, mix with it a yolk of a raw egg, about two
    ounces of sweet butter. Beat slowly so as to get it thick,
    something like a hollandaise; add a few shrimps, oysters,
    mussels, and a few heads of mushrooms, cook the sole with
    it, glaze in a salamande two or three minutes and serve.

Another is duck cooked with oranges. I know how to ask for it at the
St. Regis and the Brevoort, but am not sure of the spelling. It sounds
like Duck “Bigarade.” They do it well at the Brevoort. If potatoes
are served with either of these dishes they should be potatoes
gaufrettes—on a separate plate.


_Duck Bigarade_

    To Roast: Select a young and very tender duck, prepare and
    truss it for roasting. It should be roasted on the spit or
    in the oven for fifteen to twenty-five minutes, according to
    its size and the heat of the fire.

    A domestic duck ought to be served quite rare, and should be
    killed without bleeding. Dish it after untrussing and pour
    over it a little of its gravy.

    Sauce Bigarade: Peel an orange without touching the white
    parts, cut the peel up into small, fine julienne. Plunge
    it into boiling water, and cook until it is tender. Drain
    and enclose it in a covered saucepan with four gills of
    espagnole or brown sauce. Just when ready to serve finish
    the sauce with a dash of cayenne pepper, meat glaze, the
    orange juice and the juice of a lemon, strain through a
    tamis, adding two ounces of fine butter.




LXIX

_S. S. McClure_


OMELETTE—AND PIE

I can give you a tip on how to prepare, in the very best fashion, two
articles of food.

The first is omelette: The frying pan should be held at a slant, with
the lower part immediately over a moderate heat, and continually the
volume of eggs that becomes cooked should be scraped back and the
liquid part allowed to flow over the pan thus emptied, and then when
the omelette is, I should say, about two-thirds cooked, it should be
removed from the fire and dished.

It is impossible to make an omelette of the utmost symmetry and
firmness and have it good at the same time. If it is stiff enough to
maintain a certain symmetry, then it is too stiff to be good. I have
made an omelette in this fashion containing as many as eighteen eggs. I
learned how to make omelette from Madame Poulard of Mont St. Michel in
Normandy, one of the most famous omelette makers in Europe.

I am also particularly successful in making pies. On one occasion I
made pies for one hundred and eighty-five officers on the troop-ship
_Leviathan_. To make pies, one must have the best quality of butter and
the best quality of flour. Use a pound of butter to every two pounds
of flour. The butter must be rather firm and must be mixed with the
flour with your hands. Then when you have a sort of a mass of dough on
the table, make a little hollow in the middle, pour in a little cold
water, mix it to such a consistency that it can be made into a roll
perhaps as thick as your wrist. It will require about two inches to be
rolled out thin for the crusts. Dust a little flour in the dish that it
is to be baked in and put into the oven at such a temperature as would
require one half an hour to bake. There’s a considerable secret in the
choice of fruits. The top crust should have little apertures in it so
as to permit the steam to escape. It is easier to make perfect pies
than any other dish.




LXX

_Basil King_


LOBSTER Á LA KING

Boil medium sized lobsters. Let grow cold and remove meat. Put large
piece of butter and one and one-half tablespoons of flour into double
boiler. Stir until creamy. Add one pint of milk and cook about five
minutes. Add lobster cut in small pieces and cook about fifteen
minutes. Just before serving; add three tablespoons cream and one-half
tumbler sherry or brandy.

_Note_: Unless brandy or sherry can be added it is useless to attempt
this dish.




LXXI

_John A. Moroso_


SPAGHETTI-FOR-THE-GANG

Many a time as a very small boy I watched my distinguished Piedmontese
grandfather grandly direct the cook. This is the way our spaghetti
sauce was prepared. Buy about three or four pounds of solid meat from
the round, cut thick. Ask for the “eye of the beef.” It is inexpensive.
Cut little pockets in it and insert bits of fat bacon in some. In
others stuff sage, thyme, parsley and bay leaf with salt and pepper
to taste. Sometimes I spread thinly with mustard, the prepared sort;
covering the top. A clove of garlic tucked in with the seasoning goes
well, if you have Wop ancestry. Pale people use onions. But surely one
or the other.

Grease well a deep iron skillet with iron top, the pot-roast utensil.
When the gravy begins to drip add a little water, but not much. The
steam makes the meat tender and brings out all the flavors in the
little pockets. Baste from time to time just to get the aroma of the
simmering mess and sharpen your appetite. Take a little wire and jab it
in the roast after about an hour and twenty minutes and you’ll find out
whether it is tender and juicy enough.

Put the big pot on and get your water boiling fast. Add a good sized
kitchen spoon of salt. Better salt the water to taste. Throw in a
pound of Italian made spaghetti ... the Farina spaghetti. It requires a
certain kind of wheat to make good macaroni. Boil for twenty minutes.
Drain off water.

To the rich gravy you will find the roast swimming in add a small
can of tomato paste, stirring in slowly. As this is poured over the
spaghetti add grated Roman cheese. You will get it all properly dressed
by using two forks, lifting and dropping the strands. Serve piping hot
with an automatic revolver at hand so that the man who cuts his can be
disposed of promptly. Some twine the spaghetti about the fork. Others
just lead a mass of it to the face and bite off what they want at that
particular mastication.

A good salad and Italian bread, to be secured at any small dealer’s
where the boss sings _Santa Lucia_ in a thin high voice as he slices
the salami, goes well with the roast. This layout will last an old
bachelor or a deserted husband two or three days. It’s grand when it’s
warmed up in a boiler.




LXXII

_F. X. Leyendecker_


VEAU SAUTÉ MARENGO

During my Paris days (school days) I became very fond of two dishes and
they still remain my favorites:

No. 1—Veau Sauté Marengo—nothing epicurean about this, but real tasty;
a ragout of veal which must be served in a brown pot. It is flavored
with tiny onions and mushrooms, olives and a delicious sauce. I have
never found it quite so well prepared as in Paris.

    Fry some small pieces of veal in oil, add one chopped onion,
    one head of crushed garlic and when it is well brown strain
    it, add one glass of white wine and reduce. Moisten it with
    one quart of brown sauce. Add two pounds fresh tomatoes and
    some fine herbs. Cook slowly for an hour and a half.

    Put the meat in another pan, add few small onions cooked in
    butter, some small mushrooms already cooked.

    Dress and serve on toast fried in butter.

No. 2—Vol au Vent Financière—a pastry form filled with mushrooms, cubes
of chicken, something else, and a good sauce. This also seems not quite
the same outside of Paris.


VOL AU VENT FINANCIÉRE

    Put four ounces of butter in a saucepan, add four ounces
    of cooked sweetbread cut in three-sixteenth inch squares,
    small bits of the white of chicken, some truffles, olives,
    mushrooms, kidney and cock’s combs.

    Moisten with one pint of Madeira sauce, let boil and
    despumate; when the sauce is done strain it through a tamis,
    fill your pastry crust and serve.

    EDITOR’S NOTE:—The recipes are French, and properly prepared
    and served, they will prove the real thing in Keokuk as well
    as in the Quartier Latin.




LXXIII

_Eddie Cantor_


BOILED BEEF AND HORSERADISH SAUCE

I love boiled beef and horseradish sauce—I love it better than any
other dish in the world!

Anybody knows how to boil beef. And a good horseradish sauce is made in
this fashion.

Melt a good sized lump of the best butter—almost as big as an egg,
is good sized. Add to this, first removing from the fire, about two
tablespoonsful of flour. Stir the flour and butter together until the
mixture is absolutely smooth, and then add cold milk—a trifle more
than a half pint, a shade less than a pint. Put over a slow fire in a
sauce pan or, for safety’s sake, a double-boiler. Cook slowly until the
sauce is of the desired consistency, and then add your horseradish.
If you like the sauce very hot add a lot of horseradish. If you like
it moderate, a little horseradish. The best way is to begin with a
teaspoonful and keep adding and tasting until it’s O. K. Salt and
pepper to taste, of course. And, if you like it, a dash of celery salt.




LXXIV

_Frazier Hunt_


STUFFED CELERY

I like food. I like almost any kind of food. I’ve eaten all
varieties—in great cities and in out of the way corners of the world.
And I’ve never found anything that I couldn’t eat, if I were hungry
enough!

But best of all I think that I like stuffed celery. It’s easy to fix,
and it’s slightly out of the ordinary, and it’s possible to consume a
lot of it without being looked down upon by those who are dining with
you. Because everybody eats a lot of stuffed celery.

To a half pound of Roquefort cheese add a quarter of a pound of butter.
Cream them together until they are as smooth as it is possible to make
any mixture containing Roquefort cheese. Then add a dessertspoonful—or
a tablespoonful, if you like—of Worcestershire sauce. A little salt,
and some paprika, enough to slightly color the mixture. And then—

Take stalks of celery—very white and crisp and fresh. And stuff the
hollow side, until it bulges, with the Roquefort mixture. And serve
with your dinner, or after dinner, or with the salad, or all alone. It
doesn’t matter when or where you place it on the menu, for it’s apt to
be the dominant note!




LXXV

_William Slavins McNutt_


ORANGE COMPOTE

Orange Compote is my favorite dish. After my fourth I begin to forget
that I’m a human being. After my sixth I can feel myself drifting into
a blissfully comatose state—with only strength enough left to call for
a seventh.

Orange Compote, at its best, may be obtained in any small Turkish or
Armenian restaurant where the coffee is good and the dishes aren’t too
offensively clean. When made at home it is never quite the same—I don’t
know why. This, however, is the best working substitute that I am able
to concoct.

Take as many oranges as your system is capable of absorbing, and peel
them, removing all of the thin white inside skin, and all of the
film-like tissue that divides an orange into sections. I forgot to
mention that the orange should be large, luscious, juicy and free of
seeds. Place the oranges in individual serving dishes and pour over
them this sauce, while hot:

For about six oranges you will need one middle-sized jar of orange
marmalade and one small can of Hawaiian pineapple. Put the marmalade,
the pineapple—cut into small cubes—and the pineapple juice into a
double boiler and cook, briskly, until the liquid begins to thicken.
Then pour it over the uncooked oranges and allow them—each in its
individual dish—to stand in the ice box until dessert time. Just before
serving, sprinkle with a few pine nuts, or salted almonds. Pine nuts
are best.




LXXVI

_Stephen Vincent Benet_


ZITELLI’S MACARONI STEW

Take one-half pound of real Italian macaroni, boil it in plenty of
water, slightly salted, till soft, say, about twenty minutes; take one
quart of tomatoes, one-half pint of water and two ounces of fat bacon
cut into small pieces. Now one onion and a small bunch of parsley; boil
all these together (apart from the macaroni) for half an hour, then
pass the mixture through a colander; add one tablespoonful of butter
and season with salt and pepper to taste.

Put it on the fire again and let it boil for five minutes. Let the
macaroni and the sauce both be very hot. In a tureen place a layer of
the macaroni covered with grated cheese; then cover with a ladleful of
the sauce and repeat the layers until the entire amount is served. It
should be dished in deep soup plates for individual servings.




LXXVII

_James R. Quirk_


TOMATO WIGGLE

To one pound of diced American cheese, add one can of Campbell’s
Tomato Soup. Heat over a slow fire until a thick, smooth mass has been
obtained. And then—

Add one beaten egg, and follow it quickly with a cup of cream or very
rich milk. Stir in a dessertspoonful of Worcestershire Sauce, and
enough salt to give the proper kick.

Serve on soda crackers that have been heated—large soda crackers.

The name? That’s just to make it difficult.




LXXVIII

_Charles W. Eliot_


A FAVORITE MENU

I can hardly say that I have a “favorite dish.” But a favorite menu for
luncheon or dinner is clam soup, corned beef hash, and baked Indian
pudding.

    _Note._—If you want to try Dr. Eliot’s menu why not use Rex
    Beach’s clam specialty?

    Then for the corned beef hash get plenty of fine lean corned
    beef and cut it into one-eighth inch bits.

    Chop one small onion into very fine particles. Take cold
    boiled potatoes (fairly firm) and cut or chop.

    Prepare some drawn butter and add a few drops of
    Worcestershire sauce, salt and pepper. Now mix the meat,
    potatoes, onion and drawn butter. Mold and pat into small,
    flat, elliptical loaves (individual servings) and fry in
    a hot, lightly buttered pan. Turn frequently until well
    browned on both sides. Serve sprinkled with minced parsley.

    Top off with this baked Indian pudding:

    You must have 1 quart of milk, 3 eggs, ½ cup of the
    finest seeded raisins, 1 teaspoonful of salt, 2 heaping
    tablespoonsful of corn meal, 4 heaping tablespoonsful of
    sugar, 1 heaping tablespoonful of butter.

Boil the milk in a double boiler and sprinkle in the corn meal,
stirring all the time. Cook twelve minutes.

Beat the eggs, adding the salt, sugar and a half teaspoonful of ground
ginger. Add this mixture with the butter to milk and meal, then add the
raisins and stir until perfectly mixed. Remove from the double boiler
and bake for one hour.

You will agree with Dr. Eliot.




LXXIX

_H. S. Cumming_

(Surgeon General, U.S.P.H.S.)


VIRGINIA EGG BREAD

I am particularly fond of this dish—it is, I think, my favorite, and
I pass along the recipe with the hope that others will find it as
satisfying and delicious as do those who already list it among their
favorites.

    1 cup water ground corn meal (white)
    2½ cups boiling water
    1 cup sweet milk
    3 or 4 eggs
    1 teaspoonful salt
    2 tablespoonsful butter
    2 teaspoonsful sugar

Stir boiling water into the sifted meal; add sweet milk; when cool
break eggs into the mixture and beat thoroughly; add salt, sugar and
butter melted. Bake in well buttered baking dish in hot oven.




LXXX

_Joseph Santley_


COCOA CREAM CAKE

I will admit that it sounds a good deal like “pink sponge cake” to
announce a preference for anything so epicureanly flippant as cocoa
cream cake. But it is the one dish that I prefer above any other, and
in justice to truth and accuracy, I repeat—my favorite is cocoa cream
cake! And my own dear mother will have to stand the responsibility for
whatever shame comes to me by openly declaring it. You see, she makes
it. And it was from her I learned the secret of its concoction.

Here is the recipe:

Four eggs, one cup of sugar, one cup of cocoa, a teaspoonful of
vanilla, and a teaspoonful of baking powder. Cream yolks of eggs and
sugar _well_; add the vanilla. Sift the cocoa and baking powder well,
and add to the eggs and sugar. Last of all stir in the whites of the
eggs, beaten. Bake in two layers, for about ten minutes. When cold
whip a pint of thick cream with a teaspoonful of vanilla and sugar to
taste—placing half between the layers and half on top.

Oh, boy!




LXXXI

_A. Hamilton Gibbs_


SQUAB EN CASSEROLE

In a casserole put generous layer of sliced onion sauté, two sliced
tomatoes sauté, two cups of mushrooms, two cups of potato balls, and a
little fresh parsley also sauté. (All the vegetables should be fried in
butter). On top place, breast up, a squab or a one-pound chicken—one
for each person. On each breast place a slice of crisp fried bacon.
Over all pour some rich well-seasoned brown sauce, filling the
casserole up with the chicken breasts—three-quarters full—preferably
with a cup of sherry added last, if your cellar will still produce it!

Place the casserole in a hot oven, uncovered. When the breasts are
brown, cool oven to a moderate heat, cover the casserole and cook for
two hours. Then remove the casserole and serve from dish.

The result is an epicurean masterpiece.




LXXXII

_Richard Barthelmess_


SPICED GRAPES

This dish is always reminiscent, to me, of low New England farmhouses,
with green blinds. You know the kind—set far back from the road, among
tall trees, with hollyhocks, and rose geraniums and old fashioned pinks
in the garden. When I see such a house—and I can, sometimes, by closing
my eyes—I can always smell the pungent scent of spiced grapes, cooking
away on an immaculate kitchen range.

This is the rule for making spiced grapes. A rule that most New England
families seem to follow.

To seven pounds of grapes there should be added these materials—three
pounds of granulated sugar, one cup of vinegar, two tablespoonsful of
ground cinnamon, and one tablespoonful of ground cloves.

Weigh the grapes, wash and pulp them. Cook the pulp until the seeds are
loosened—then press the mass through a sieve. Cook the skins just as
long as you cook the pulps. Put them on the same stove, but in separate
kettles. Add the strained pulps to the skins, then vinegar, sugar, and
spices. And cook until the mixture thickens.

This, when served with cold meat, changes a commonplace supper of
left-overs into a feast.




LXXXIII

_Don Juan y Gayangos_

(Ambassador to the United States, from Spain)


EGG PLANT AU GRATIN

Peel the egg plant.

Whiten it in salty water, and dry.

Fry, in butter, with salt sprinkled on each piece.

Place in a dish with grated cheese, tomato sauce, and mushrooms, which
have been cut into small pieces and put thickly between the layers of
egg plant.

Bake, until well cooked, in a moderate oven.




LXXXIV

_Samuel G. Blythe_


TRIPE Á LA MODE DE CAEN Á LA ROY CARRUTHERS

Only an artist should attempt to make Tripe à la Mode de Caen because
only an artist can make it. It requires the soul of a poet, the spirit
of a painter, and the exaltation of a violin virtuoso in the maker as
a prerequisite for its concoction. Of course, it may be eaten by the
commonalty, but it is too good for them. It really is a dish for the
intelligentsia.

There are not more than a dozen people in the United States who have
the temperament and the touch required. One of these is Roy Carruthers.
And herewith, as my favorite recipe, I set down the complicated but
necessary, procedure for producing this work of art:

Take four pounds of fresh honeycomb tripe and one pound of fresh
manyplies tripe (the thickest part) and wash thoroughly in many changes
of fresh water. Drain well, and scrape to have all absolutely clean.
Take two calf’s feet and carefully bone each foot and cut into pieces
two inches square. Have a large earthen pot, scrupulously clean, and
line sides and bottom of this pot with very thin slices of larding
pork. Place tripe and cut up feet in pot.

Add two small red carrots, two white onions with two cloves stuck
in each, and half of a sound, seeded pepper. Make a bouquet of two
leeks, two branches of celery, three branches of parsley, and a sprig
of thyme, marjoram, a blade of mace and a bay leaf—only one. Put this
bouquet in the pot and pour in a half pint of white wine, a pint of
cider and a quart of consomme or white broth. Season with a full
teaspoon of salt and half a spoon of black pepper.

Now make a stiff dough with a pound of white flour and two gills of
water, roll out on a table until you have enough to cover the pot, and
cover closely, making sure there can be no evaporation.

Place pot in a very slow oven and cook for fifteen hours.

Then lift up the cover, skim off the fat, and remove the bouquet of
herbs and the vegetables.

Chop together six shallots, or scallions if shallots are not
procurable, the red part of a carrot, a bean of sound garlic, two
ounces of raw ham and an ounce of raw lean pork. Place this hash in a
saucepan with a tablespoon of melted butter, cook gently on the fire
for five minutes, stirring lightly, and then pour in half a gill of
cognac and let it reduce briskly until it is nearly dry.

Put the contents of the pot on the saucepan, add a gill of pure tomato
juice, mix lightly with a wooden spoon, and cook slowly for forty-five
minutes.

Then dress the tripe on a deep hot dish, sprinkle a little freshly
chopped parsley over and send to table very hot with twelve slices of
toasted French bread.

That is real Tripe à la mode de Caen. All others are imitations.




LXXXV

_Charles H. Taylor_


CLAM CHOWDER

Try out salt pork. Take out the scraps. Cut up onions and fry them in
the pork fat until they are a golden brown. Open clams and save all the
clam water. (Most chefs steam the clams first because they are so much
easier to handle, but if you want the real flavor you want to shell the
clams, wash the meat over carefully and let the clam water settle and
dip it out instead of pouring it into your kettle so as to leave out
the sand.)

Add to the onions enough hot water to cover them, put in clam water
and the bellies of the clams. Cook until the bellies of the clams have
practically disappeared (about two hours). Then add whatever more
hot water is necessary, add the rest of your clam meat, after having
first cut off the black end of the head, and run the meat through the
coarsest cutting disk of your meat grinder. Cook until clams are very
nearly done and then add your sliced white potato. Cook again until the
potatoes are done. Then add whatever milk you put in and let it come
to a boil. Put into the chowder what we call Boston cracker. They are
shaped like a water cracker only they are soft. Split them in halves.
These will soften up immediately and you can then serve your chowder.

Do not use any flour for thickening. If the chowder is prepared and the
bellies of the clams cooked as above, this will make the broth thicken
up.




LXXXVI

_Cyrus H. K. Curtis_


BAKED BEANS

(_My Favorite Dish_)

To prepare Mr. Curtis’ favorite food is no difficult task and any
number of methods original and otherwise may be followed.

For the best results have a large covered bean pot and the rest is easy.

Select fine white or navy beans. Wash them thoroughly and let them soak
in clear water for several hours—most folks soak them all night.

Place the beans in the pot with several pieces of salt pork (with fat),
cover with water slightly salted. Put the lid on the pot and bake in a
moderate oven until done. That’s plain baked beans.

Chili sauce or tomato catsup or chopped tomatoes may be added to taste.

Look at the beans occasionally and add water if they seem too dry or in
danger of burning.

Another method which produces wonderful results is to omit the pork
and tomato preparations and add generous lumps of butter and brown
sugar—better still, add genuine sorghum molasses. When you do it this
way be extra careful to see that _just enough water_ is added in small
quantities to prevent burning.

Always remove from the oven while the beans are still whole. If baked
too long they will break up. The time necessary for baking will vary
according to the heat of the oven and the length of time the beans were
soaked.




LXXXVII

_Frederick Arnold Kummer_


SPAGHETTI DIABOLIQUE

Brown one and a half pounds top plate of beef in half a cup of boiling
olive oil for one hour, turning frequently. Mince the shells of four
sweet peppers, one bunch of celery, one bunch of parsley, three large
onions, two sections of clove garlic, add a salt-spoonful of ground
thyme, a teaspoonful of salt, one of black pepper and red pepper to
taste. Add one quart of tomatoes, pour over the beef, cook for an hour,
add a pint of water and cook slowly for two hours more.

To make the spaghetti: Measure a quart of flour, break in yolks of
three eggs, add three half eggshells full of ice water, work to the
proper consistency, roll and cut into thin strips. When dry cook in
boiling salted water for twenty minutes.

Place spaghetti in the center of a dish, pour the sauce and shredded
meat around it, and serve.

    EDITOR’S NOTE:—From the several “favorite dishes” of
    spaghetti mentioned in this volume it would seem that there
    is a decided male preference for this particular article of
    diet. Mr. Kummer goes the limit and tells how to make the
    spaghetti, itself!




LXXXVIII

_Albert D. Lasker_


CHICKEN PAPRIKA

Say a five pound chicken—do it this way and see how you like it.

Slice four small onions. Put one-sixth pound of butter into pan, add
onions and let cook over fire until soft and a light brown in color.
Add two teaspoonsful of paprika and put in the chicken piece by piece,
fitting into kettle; add 1¼ tablespoonsful of salt, cover tightly
and cook until soft (two hours or more). Remove the chicken, and
into the gravy add 1¼ tablespoonsful of canned tomatoes; shake in a
tablespoonful of flour and stir well; add ¾ pint of sour cream and stir
well over the fire. Strain over the chicken; heat again and serve.




LXXXIX

_Henry van Dyke_


FISH CHOWDER

I will say that I like to cook (and if I have good luck, to eat) a dish
for which the following is the recipe:

First catch your fish with hook and line,—salmon, trout or bass, cod,
haddock or blue-fish. Then obtain a good sized kettle and put into it,
first a layer of sliced potatoes, then a fine sprinkling of fine sliced
onion, then a layer of fat pork cut into small cubes, then a layer
of fish, skinned and sliced, then a layer of crackers or thin pilot
biscuit. Sprinkle salt and pepper on each layer according to taste.
Repeat the layers from three to five times according to the size of
your kettle. Fill the pot moderately full with water and put it on the
fire to cook slowly. If the water gets low replenish it. You can tell
when the dish is done by testing the potatoes or the fish with a fork.
As a rule it should take about an hour to cook. Just before the end put
in two or three cupfuls of milk. If your taste is slightly vitiated
by contact with the world you may add a double spoonful of some spicy
sauce. But for my part I like a chowder best _au naturel_.




XC

_Macklyn Arbuckle_


SOUTHERN GUMBO Á LA “COUNTY CHAIRMAN”

A year-old fowl. Joint it as you would for frying.

Soup kettle ready on the back of the stove with cold water.

Then, the frying pan—

About one-half dozen thin slices of the best bacon. Reserve this for
the kettle later.

Bacon fat in the frying pan—fry the chicken very brown. As soon as each
piece of chicken is brown place it in the kettle—then put the kettle
over the fire. Let it boil.

Add six small onions or three large ones. Sliced and fried in the bacon
grease.

Onions fried golden brown.

Then to the onions add a can of tomatoes or the equivalent of sliced
tomatoes.

Keep stirring from the bottom to prevent burning.

All must cook until it has thickened.

While cooking add chili peppers cut fine, green peppers the same, also
okra.

Add one or two large bay leaves and season to taste with salt and
pepper.

Onions, tomatoes and peppers should be added to the chicken in the
kettle when they have cooked sufficiently.

If fresh okra is not available use the best canned kind.

About ten minutes before the Gumbo is ready add—

One can of Golden Bantam Corn.

To serve with the Gumbo have a dish of perfectly cooked rice. You may
use the same general formula for Crab or Oyster Gumbo. A Combination
Salad is about the only thing worth serving with Gumbo. Although you
might wash it down with a bottle of PRE-WAR IMPORTED CLARET—HELP!!!!




XCI

_John Taintor Foote_


MORELS SAUTÉ

There is a dish—a gastronomical ecstasy—the faintest conception of
which is magnificently beyond the pen. The fork is the one utensil that
can convey to the uninitiated the unique, the utterly sublime flavor of
Morels sauté.

A Morel is—in the vernacular of the countryside—a sponge mushroom. It
is to be found in ancient, unplowed orchards during the pastel phase of
spring when apple trees blossom and bees zoom and bumble and hum in a
languid shower of pink and white petals.

Close to a girthy apple tree, scabrous with age, pock-marked by the
bills of countless woodpeckers, the Morels, now and then—alas, it is
only now and then—poke up through the cold, damp, chocolate-colored
earth and flourish shyly for a fortnight or so.

A full day’s tramping through orchard after orchard may win perhaps
two dozen of these tiny sponges that have absorbed the very essence of
spring. They are almost the exact color of the matted, winter-killed
grass in which they nestle to defy all but the most careful searching.
A full day’s work for each two dozen, but never was a day’s wage more
ample, more exquisitely satisfying.

Take the hard-won double dozen home. Give them in reverent silence to
the cook. She knows—if, by the grace of God, she was with you so long
ago as the previous spring—just what to do. She will plop the Morels
into well salted water, there to remain the night through. In the
morning she will place them in a colander to drain for half an hour.
She will then transfer them to a frying pan of hot butter, where they
will sputter and sizzle for twenty minutes. During that twenty minutes
there will waft into the living room, where you are making a pitiful
pretense of reading the morning paper, an odor straight from the
kitchens of heaven.

You throw down the newspaper and burst with glaring eyes into the
dining room. You seat yourself at the table and fiddle wildly with
knife and fork and spoon.... Years later the waitress appears with a
dish and then—I faint—I swoon—I cannot go on!




XCII

_Maurice Francis Egan_


A DIPLOMATIST’S RECEIPT FOR WELSH RABBIT

I have no hesitation in saying that my recipe for Welsh Rabbit is the
best yet invented. It has an international reputation. It has been
eaten with gusto by Russians, Turks and some Englishmen who, strange
to say, are distinguished _gourmets_. There have been Frenchmen who
were too reserved, perhaps, in their praise of it, but then it must
be remembered that Welsh rabbit is not sympathetic with the Gallic
temperament. The French prefer _timbales de fromage_.

Put a large chafing dish over the hot water pan in which the water
must be boiling. Never let the temperature of the heat change for a
moment; therefore a big alcohol lamp is preferable. Grate ordinary
cheese or cut it into the shape of dice. Drop in a lump of butter
of the size of an English walnut. Pour into the pan a pint of near
beer or near Budweiser. Slightly heat it. In the old days musty ale
was everything. To-day the symbol of beer is almost sufficient. Drop
in a half teaspoonful of strong red pepper and then a tablespoonful
of paprika,—paprika being merely a flavor and not a condiment. Keep
the beer hot; then drop two tablespoons of Worcestershire sauce, a
tablespoon of catsup and a half teaspoon of mustard. When this mixture
boils, put in the cheese and stir in one direction until the mixture
assumes the consistency of cream.

Use the thick plates sold in the department stores especially for Welsh
Rabbit. Have them heated so that the cheese will sizzle when it touches
them. Have ready a sufficient number of pieces of toasted bread, the
crust carefully cut off. When the cheese is sufficiently plastic, dip
a round of toast into it, let it remain for a second, transfer it to
the hot plate and _at once_ ladle the mixture in the pan over the toast
with neatness and dispatch and you will have an unprecedented success,
if no conversation is permitted until the rabbit is eaten. The sound
of a human voice lowers its temperature. Coffee or tea must never
be partaken of until the morsels are disposed of. During the eating
process, Budweiser is a substitute for the real thing—which was musty
ale or the Dog’s Head variety.




XCIII

_Livingston Farrand_


SAUSAGE AND GRIDDLE CAKES

I think I would say that my favorite dish is sausage and griddle cakes
for breakfast on a cold winter morning. I would call attention to the
fact that the sausages should be in cake form and not in skins and
that the griddle cakes should be of wheat flour. I am sure there are
millions of Americans who agree with me.

    EDITOR’S NOTE:—Here is the best of a dozen tried recipes for
    the cakes.

    To one cup of Hecker’s, or any excellent self-raising flour
    (not pancake!) add a full half cup of milk and a beaten egg
    mixed together. A little cream will help at this point, but
    it isn’t absolutely necessary.

    Melt, now, a lump of butter the size of a good big walnut
    and stir it into the mixture. Beat for a moment and if the
    consistency does not seem just right add a shade more of
    milk or flour. The mixture or batter should be about as
    thick as molasses in the winter time.

    For the very perfection in results bake the cakes on a
    soapstone griddle and serve with the best maple syrup
    obtainable.

    This recipe can be safely doubled any number of times and
    then some! As above it serves two unless more are desired,
    in which case it is easy to duplicate in no time.




XCIV

_F. Ziegfeld, Jr._


LITTLE CHICKEN TARTS

Here is a dish that I am very fond of and it is really very easy to
prepare. The tart molds may be purchased already made, which simplifies
things somewhat if you do not want to bother with the dough, but in
case you cannot get them here is the whole process and I can vouch for
the results.

    2 cups of chopped chicken (cooked) or one large can Chicken à la King
    ½ cup evaporated milk
    2 eggs
    1 onion
    2 cups sifted flour
    ½ cup shortening
    ½ cup water
    1 teaspoonful salt
    Pepper
    Parsley
    Ice water

Mix salt and flour—cut in the chilled shortening with two knives until
the mixture is as fine as meal. With a broad-bladed knife stir in ice
water slowly until dough clings around knife in a ball, leaving sides
of bowl perfectly clean. Toss dough on floured bread board. Flour the
rolling pin and roll it out very thin. Keep the pin well floured. Rub
the outside of patty pans or jelly molds with a little shortening and
lay dough over these smoothly, bringing it well over the edge. Bake
upside down for about ten minutes in a hot oven. If Chicken à la King
is used for a filling it will not require any special preparation, but
if you really want to cook, and you use the cold chicken, proceed as
follows:

Cut the chicken in small pieces, but do not mince. Mince onion and cook
until slightly brown in a little butter. Stir in a tablespoonful of
flour, add milk and water. When smooth add chicken and season to taste.
When bubbling take from the fire and stir in the slightly beaten eggs.
Let cool, then fill the pastry shells. The remainder of the pastry
dough should have been kept in the ice box. Get it out. Roll it thin
as before. Cut in round pieces to cover the tops of the tarts. Wet the
edges of the tarts with cold water; press on the covers, bringing the
edges well down as they shrink a bit in baking. Slit the tops before
putting on. Press the edges with tines of fork. Garnish with parsley.




XCV

_Harold Lloyd_


LEMON LAYER CAKE

This, when properly gummy, is as good for a comedian to throw as a
custard pie. Only it’s too good for that sort of treatment—which sounds
rather like an Irish bull!

The layer cake doesn’t interest me especially. After all, it’s only an
excuse for the frosting. Any sort of layer cake recipe will answer—and,
according to the best cook I know, my grandmother—there are a hundred
such recipes. It’s the filling that I find important. Here is the rule,
and it sounds too simple to be true!

Take one beaten egg, one cup of sugar, the juice and grated rind of
one lemon. Mix them all together, hit or miss, and place them in a
double boiler over a hot fire. Cook until the mixture begins to get
very thick, stirring constantly. Then take from the stove and beat
until the whole assumes a creamy texture. Spread between the layers
of any cake. This recipe makes enough filling for two thin layers, or
one thick one—which I prefer. It can be doubled, tripled, and so on—ad
infinitum—depending entirely upon the number of layers in the cake.

    EDITOR’S NOTE:—This is a good, and unusual, recipe for layer
    cake. To two eggs, well beaten, add gradually one cup of
    granulated sugar. To one cup of unsifted flour add one
    teaspoonful cream of tartar and one half teaspoonful of
    soda. Sift. Then add one half cup of boiling milk with one
    teaspoonful of melted butter in it, and one teaspoonful of
    vanilla. The mixture will be almost like batter, and should
    be baked in two layers.




XCVI

_Luther Burbank_


TURKEY Á LA BURBANK

“_The best ever._”[A]

For an ordinary ten-pound turkey _steam_ 2½ hours or until the muscles
of the leg can be readily pierced with a dining fork. Take steamer from
the fire and carefully remove the turkey to the roasting pan.

Meantime, prepare the dressing as follows: One loaf of bread, ordinary
baker’s size, or same amount of other bread, slice and toast slowly
but thoroughly to a light golden color; while hot, spread butter on
each slice just as a hungry boy would like it. Place in a deep dish.
The cooked giblets, which, with the juice of one lemon and three whole
large onions, should be ground all together in a meat grinder with

    1 teaspoon salt
    ½ teaspoon cayenne pepper
    1 teaspoon powdered sage
    2 teaspoon summer savory
    2 tablespoons sugar

These should be well sifted and then added to the ground vegetables
and giblets, and with the meat juice saved from steaming, thoroughly
mixed with the bread and all cut and mashed to about the consistency of
thick mush. After filling, the turkey should be placed in an oven not
too hot, and _slowly_ roasted an hour or more.

Prepared as above, little or no basting will be necessary, but a
few thin slices of bacon laid over the fowl will add flavor. Add no
oysters, eggs, chestnuts or other abominations.

FOOTNOTES:

[A] Mr. Burbank says so himself. If he said he could make turkey look
and taste like brook trout, he probably could.




XCVII

_Raymond McKee_


TO COOK RABBITS

I do not profess to be a cook of the first rank, or even the fourth or
ninth; but when it comes to cooking rabbits I’ll put on the kitchen
apron with any cook, amateur or professional, in the country—(managers,
please note!). And I’ll abide by the decision of any judge of rabbit
flesh.

Out in California, where I live most of the time on my mountain yacht,
you can get a lot of rabbits by shooting them—if you are good. But it’s
easier to buy them, and they taste the same.

To cook a rabbit right do it this way: First—get the rabbit, clean and
cut into six pieces. Soak the pieces in salt water for several hours—I
usually soak ’em all night and right up to the time for cooking. This
whitens and improves the meat.

When you are ready to cook, dry the pieces; roll them in a beaten egg
and then in cracker crumbs. Put the pieces into a very hot pan with
plenty of butter and fry it to a golden brown. When the color is right
put water into the pan so that the rabbit is about half covered. Cover
the pan with a tight lid and steam slowly until the water is all gone.
Then serve.

Now, if you can substitute an ordinary claret for the salt water
mentioned first, and if you have more claret in which to steam the
fried rabbit you may know the perfect dish!




XCVIII

_Will Deming_


I can vouch for all of these:


VIRGINIA HAM

Cover an eight-pound ham with cold water. Add a pint of cider vinegar;
one-half pound of brown sugar; six sticks of cinnamon and a heaping
tablespoonful of cloves. Let this boil for four hours. Push back on the
stove and let it stay all night. In the morning skin it and put it in a
hot oven for half an hour.


LEMON PIE

The filling: In a cup full of sugar mix thoroughly a heaping
tablespoonful and one-half of flour. Grate the skin of one lemon, and
add the juice. Then add the yolks of two eggs and a cup of water, also
a pinch of salt. Stir this thoroughly, all together. Put into a double
boiler and let it cook until it is thick and smooth. Then pour it into
the cooked pie crust. Add a teaspoonful of water to the whites of the
eggs, and a pinch of salt. Then beat until stiff. Cover your pie with
this mixture and then sprinkle granulated sugar on top of the meringue.
Don’t mix the sugar and the meringue. Put under the broiler to brown.

The crust: Mix two good sized tablespoonfuls of lard with one and a
half cups of flour. Mix this with your fingers thoroughly, until it
feels like corn meal, although much larger. Add ice water until the
mixture holds together; then roll on a floured board. In baking the
crust for a lemon pie, either puncture the crust all over with a fork
or bake it on the outside of your pie tin. This will keep the crust
from creeping.


A DRESSING

(For stuffed tomatoes, cold meat or potato salad.)

Melt a large tablespoonful of butter. Add a saucer of vinegar to
the yolks of two eggs. Then add a teaspoonful of dry mustard and a
teaspoonful of sugar. Stir the mixture—sugar and eggs—into the vinegar;
then add it to the butter which you have on the stove, melting. Keep
stirring this until it gets thick, and remember that it will be much
thicker when it is cold. In case you wish to use this for potato salad,
don’t make it very thick.




XCIX

_Charles W. Chessar_

(“Beefsteak Charlie”)


TIPS ON STEAK

“Why can’t we have steaks like this one when we dine at home?”
Thousands of people have asked me that question during the eight years
that have given a real significance to the sobriquet, “Beefsteak
Charlie.”

And my honest answer to that question has always been: “_You
can’t_—unless your butcher is willing to _hang your beef for four or
five weeks_—and then you probably would not want to buy it because of
its appearance.”

Many people ask me how to cook a steak. There is really no secret about
the way it should be done—but most home cooks put the steak into a cold
broiler and light the fire. That is fatal! And it is just as fatal if
the fire has only been burning a few minutes. The broiler should burn
full tilt for some time—until it is blazing hot. Then introduce your
steak and let the _intense heat_ of the broiler seal it instantly. If
there is a secret, that’s it!

But keep this in mind: the most careful broiling will not help if the
beef is too fresh. Fresh beef simply will not do if you want the real
thing. Buy the choicest cuts of sirloin or porterhouse from beef that
has been hung at least four weeks; broil in the way I have described
and your dinner guests will register many polite hints for another
invitation. I might add that if the beef is right you will not have to
worry about a sauce. Butter, salt, and pepper will properly dress the
finest steak in the world.




C

_Arthur T. Vance_


SALADE Á LA TURC

I don’t profess to shine much as a cook. I would rather have somebody
do it for me, but there are one or two things that I sometimes like to
fix on my own hook.

Years ago there was some sort of a Centennial Exposition out in
Nashville, Tenn. I don’t remember what they had to celebrate, but
at any rate I had to take it in. I didn’t know a soul and good old
Al Williams, the snake man—who died last year—gave me a letter of
introduction to the Turk who ran the Hoochy-Koochy show on the
midway. It is the only time I ever used a letter of introduction with
efficiency and delectation. This Turk—who, incidentally, was one of
the finest looking chaps I ever saw, and a man of education—welcomed
me with open arms. First of all I had to see the show, and I was so
enthusiastic about the gyrations of the sumptuous beauties that he did
me the great honor of asking me to dine with him, _en famille_. It was
a great experience. All the Hoochy-koochy dancers were there, in their
stage costumes, with ma and pa and mother-in-law, and mother’s great
uncle and a rabble of other folks, large and small. We had a lot of
funny things to eat, but there was one dish that really appealed to me.
They called it “Salada” and I ate of it in such copious portions that
my friend, the Turk, insisted on showing me how it was made. I have
made it many times since for my own pleasure, at least—and most folk
who try it once will try it again.

It is a salad of ripe tomatoes, cucumbers and onions. The main point
is that you must not slice them up but—after you peel your onions,
cucumbers and tomatoes—put them whole into a chopping bowl, and chop
them into chunks with a chopping knife. The chunks should be about as
large as the end of your thumb. After the chopping operation, put the
whole business on the ice until it gets good and cold. Then drain off
the juice.

Add a sharp French dressing, get a big spoon and a plate and go to it.
If it doesn’t taste good, I’ll eat it myself.


PANDORA FRENCH DRESSING

I have discovered that the secret of French dressing, to my way of
thinking, is to use plenty of salt. When I make it at home—say for
five or six people—I take an ordinary salt dish or saucer and cover
the bottom with a lot of salt. Add black pepper and some of that Chili
powder that comes from a place down in Texas. This Chili powder has
a better flavor than paprika, and has a sort of onion taste to it,
but don’t use too much of it. Then I cover this with a good quantity
of olive oil and beat it up with a fork until it gets stiff. It is a
good idea to have the olive oil cold. Then add your vinegar—good,
old-fashioned cider vinegar. There is a lot of it around nowadays
because, while it is easy to turn sweet cider into hard, it is a good
deal easier to turn hard cider into vinegar. You add the vinegar to
suit your taste—and this depends a good deal on the kind of salad you
are going to have. For asparagus I like the dressing a little tart. For
lettuce, not so tart. But this is a matter you can easily adjust to
your own satisfaction.


WELSH RABBIT Á LA MORGAN ROBERTSON

I wonder how many folk who read these pages remember Morgan Robertson.
Poor old Morgan is dead and gone, now, but in his day he wrote some of
the best sea stories ever put into English. He used to keep bachelor
hall in a funny little studio down on 25th Street, off Sixth Avenue,
New York—and when his friends came to call his special delight was a
Welsh Rabbit. He told me how to make it, and I am trying to pass the
recipe on. The beauty of Robertson’s rabbit was that it never got
stringy.

First you put a good-sized lump of butter into a chafing dish and let
it sizzle. Add some Coleman’s mustard and paprika and stir it round
a bit. For six people I would use two pounds of cheese. Real old New
York State full cream cheese—none of this odoriferous imported stuff.
The kind of cheese they used to make down on the farm. Cut it up in
chunks and put it in the pan with a little beer (near beer will do),
or you could use milk. Keep adding a little more beer as the cheese
commences to melt and put in a little Worcestershire sauce, if you
like it. When it is well melted take a heaping tablespoonful of corn
starch, mix it with a little water, and mix it with the mess. Meanwhile
keep stirring it. Let it bubble and when it comes to the consistency
of pancake batter (meanwhile keep stirring it—you can’t stir it too
much!) it is ready to serve. And please serve it on toasted bread. If
there is anything makes me tired, it is to have Welsh Rabbit served
on crackers—it isn’t the same thing. Don’t be afraid the rabbit will
get stringy, because it won’t. Some folks put the corn starch in dry,
instead of mixing it with water. Either way is right. Season it to suit
yourself. But for the love of Mike don’t beat an egg up in it. That’s
another kind of fish entirely.




CI

_Baron de Cartier_

(Ambassador to the United States from Belgium)


WATERZOIE DE VOLAILLE

Without doubt the most popular national dish of Belgium is Waterzoie de
Volaille—a most delectable and satisfying soup of chicken. In Brussels
the dish reaches perfection under the magic of the chef of the famous
restaurant the “Filet de Sole,” known to amateurs of good cooking in
almost every country of Europe.

I am going to tell you how they do it at the “Filet de Sole.” First of
course you will secure a fine young fowl—chicken—and, after it has been
perfectly cleaned and dressed, you will rub it well with a piece of
lemon. Now cut it up as you would for frying.

Next prepare the casserole or vessel in which the soup will be made
by generously buttering the sides and bottom. Over the bottom of the
vessel place a bed of fine julienne composed of one third of fine white
celery (remove all fibers or “strings”) one-third of the white part of
leek and one-third of white onion. To this add a bouquet composed of a
half leaf of laurel, a _soupçon_ of thyme enclosed in a few roots of
parsley, the roots having been well scraped and washed.

Upon this bed place the pieces of chicken and over the whole pour a
little more than a quart of dry white wine and veal broth—one third
broth and two thirds wine. Water may be used instead of the broth but
the latter is preferable. Season with kitchen salt, freshly ground
white pepper and a pinch of clove.

Bring the mixture to the boiling point and allow it to simmer and steam
under a tight cover for at least thirty-five minutes.

Take out the bouquet and pass the roots through a metal strainer. The
extract is to be added to the soup. Now add a large pinch of bread
crumbs.

At this point you will turn the soup into a large tureen and quickly
add the rapidly beaten yolks of four eggs, two wine glasses of extra
thick cream and a few thimblefuls of fine butter.

Complete the liaison by adding the pieces of chicken and, with a final
sprinkle of chopped parsley, the Waterzoie is ready for the table and
for your delectation.




CII

_Dean Cornwell_


SPAGHETTI-MY-STYLE

After thinking over all of the dishes that I like—searching for the
favorite—I come right back to the old standby, Spaghetti, and am forced
to admit that it is my favorite.

You know how to cook the spaghetti itself, I’m sure, so I will just
tell you how to make the sauce that I concocted some years ago and
you’ll like it.

Get a big iron kettle and put into it a lot of fine beef cut into small
squares, some chopped bacon, dried mushrooms (the kind you get at any
little Italian store) a can of tomatoes and some sliced onions. The
dried mushrooms should be soaked for an hour or two before cooking.

Cover the materials with plenty of water and season with salt, brown
sugar, and Mexican chili powder. Cook slowly all day—the longer the
better, I find.

When you are simply famished and cannot wait any longer, ladle the
sauce onto the steaming hot spaghetti and enjoy a real meal. The sauce
is still better, in my opinion, when warmed up the second day.

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber’s Notes:

Obvious punctuation errors repaired.

Á used frequently in place of the expected À for À LA. This is the
case for the entire table of contents and a few of the recipes. It was
retained as printed.

FINANCIÉRE was used twice and FINANCIÈRE once.

Page xi, “achitecture” changed to “architecture” (architecture of a
gastronomic)

Page xv, “SUPREMÊ” changed to “SUPRÊME” (SUPRÊME OF CHICKEN)

Page xv, “A” changed to “Á” to match rest of usage in table of contents
(CROUSTADE Á)

Page xxiii, “COMMADORE” changed to “COMMODORE” (Á LA COMMODORE)

Page xxiv, “EMINCE” changed to “ÉMINCE” (ÉMINCE OF CHICKEN)

Page xxv, “SAUTÈ” changed to “SAUTÉ” (VEAU SAUTÉ)

Page xxvi, “SAUTÈ” changed to “SAUTÉ” twice (EGGPLANT SAUTÉ) (MORELS
SAUTÉ)

Page 100, the more usual “Boullabaise” has been printed as
“Bouillebaisse” more than once. It was retained as printed.






End of Project Gutenberg's The Stag Cook Book, by Carroll Mac Sheridan

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STAG COOK BOOK ***

***** This file should be named 48695-0.txt or 48695-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/8/6/9/48695/

Produced by Emmy and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from
images generously made available by The Internet Archive)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.